Vilcin, a journalist for Génération 80 radio, died from injuries sustained when he was hit by a tear gas canister while protesting the detention of a colleague.

In 2020, UNESCO issued a Brief on journalists covering protests, sounding the alarm on the rising number of journalist killed while covering protests, and calling for their protection.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists
50 UNESCO World Heritage sites are home to glaciers (A total of 18,600 glaciers have been identified in these 50 sites, covering around 66,000 km2), representing almost 10% of the Earth’s total glacierized area. They include the highest (next to Mt. Everest), the longest (in Alaska), and the last remaining glaciers in Africa, amongst others, giving a representative overview of the general situation of glaciers in the world.

But a new study by UNESCO, in partnership with IUCN, shows these glaciers have been retreating at an accelerated rate since 2000 due to CO 2 emissions, which are warming temperatures. They are currently losing 58 billion tons of ice every year – equivalent to the combined annual water use of France and Spain– and are responsible for nearly 5% of observed global sea-level rise.
The UNESCO Report on the Safety of Journalists and the Danger of Impunity for the period 2020-21 is published on 2 November. Data shows that the impunity rate has fallen by only 9% in the last ten years - UNESCO welcomes this progress but warns such a decrease is insufficient to succeed in stopping the spiral of violence.

The UNESCO report also shows that there are no safe spaces for journalists. In 2020-2021, of the 117 journalists killed for being journalists, 91 – or 78% – were killed while off the clock, for example at home, in their vehicles or in the street but not on specific assignment. Several were killed in front of family members, including their children.
Sharif, a renowned Pakistani investigative journalist and news-show host was shot dead by police while riding in a motor vehicle. According to Kenyan police, the shooting may have been the result of mistaken identity as police attempted to track a stolen car.

A former anchor for ARY News television programme Powerplay, Sharif left Pakistan in August after a warrant for his arrest had reportedly been issued for “spreading hate against the military”.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
Narcisse, who worked for privately-owned Radio Cefod was shot near his home as he was heading to work. His killing took place amidst clashes between demonstrators and security forces in the city.

In 2020, UNESCO issued a Brief on journalists covering protests, sounding the alarm on the rising number of journalist killed while covering protests, and calling for their protection.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists
A community activist and director of digital media company Voces de Córdoba, Moreno, was murdered in front of a fast-food restaurant he owned. He had been under police protection since 2019 following death threats relating to his reporting on corruption and illegal armed groups.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists
Unknown assailants reportedly dressed in police uniforms attacked Andino, a 23-year-old journalist for television news channel La Tribuna TV (LTV), and his father in their home and shot them dead on the street outside. Their bodies were recovered in different neighbourhoods of Tegucigalpa.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists
A complete and committed artist

Actor, model, singer and visual artist, Rossy de Palma made a name for herself through her roles in the films of Pedro Almodóvar and went on to work with other directors among them Robert Altman, Mike Figgis, Terry Gilliam and Patrice Leconte. Last May, she chaired the Caméra d’or jury at the Cannes Film Festival.

From the very beginning, Ms de Palma has been known for her outspokenness, her rejection of fatalism and for taking a stand. She denounces the tyranny of the gaze of others, to which she had been subjected since childhood, and which often stigmatizes difference.

She rejects all forms of discrimination and ill-treatment based on physical particularities and has notably participated in UNESCO’s 2020 United against racism campaign. Ms de Palma also promotes gender equality, advocating better representation of women at all levels of society.
A Witness to History

The palace is one of the country’s largest residences of the Ottoman era. A century after its construction, it was listed by the Lebanese Ministry of Culture as a building of historical importance. It suffered profound damage during the Lebanese civil war of 1975-1990, and underwent a 20-year restoration process. In 2010, it was re-opened to the public, but was then badly damaged again in the 4 August 2020 port blasts.

The North elevation of the Palace bore the brunt of the explosion, suffering huge out-of-plane deformation. The red tiled roofs were profoundly punctured, and every single window and door was shattered, leaving the entire edifice exposed to the elements. Photos of the damage quickly surfaced on social networks and media outlets, proving the Palace’s symbolic value to the Beiruti community.
More than a symbolic act, legal protection

The inscription of the historic centre of Odesa on the World Heritage List would recognize the exceptional universal value of this site and the duty of humanity as a whole to protect it. In legal terms, it would establish an extended protection zone under the 1972 UNESCO Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage.

Indeed, under the Convention, ratified by both Ukraine and Russia, signatories undertake to assist in the protection of listed sites. They are furthermore obliged to refrain from taking any deliberate measures which might directly or indirectly damage World Heritage.

Inscription on the List of World Heritage in Danger would moreover open access to emergency international assistance mechanisms, both technical and financial, to strengthen the protection of the property and help its rehabilitation.

To date, none of the Ukrainian cultural sites benefiting from UNESCO’s protection by virtue of their inscription on the World Heritage List have been bombed.
GLAMI, Tanzania

The NGO has been awarded the prize for its work helping adolescent girls to safely transition between education levels, complete their education, and develop into confident members of their communities through two flagship programmes. The first, Binti Shupau, meaning ‘courageous daughters’ in Swahili, supports girls as they transition from primary to secondary school. The second, Kisa – meaning ‘story’ in Swahili is a two-year leadership programme which prepares girls for university, and empowers them to create social change in their communities. Working through 42 partner schools, GLAMI has changed the lives of 7,400 girls in 11 districts in the regions of Kilimanjaro and Arusha.

More about GLAMI
Blanco, of Mabinay-based Power 102.1 DYRY RFM, was stabbed to death on his way to work.

Better known as Percy Lapid, Mabasa hosted a programme on DWBL 1242 and was known for his critical perspective on political and social issues.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists
Moreover, UNESCO will support teachers in Ukraine by developing pedagogical skills for distance and hybrid learning. Google.org – the company's philanthropic arm – is supporting UNESCO to build a suite of resources and courses for teacher professional development. These resources will focus on mental health, psychosocial support, social and emotional learning, and digital pedagogical training.

As part of this agreement, Google will also provide schools in Ukraine with access to the Chrome Education Upgrade, allowing them to set-up and manage the devices remotely. And is working with local partners to deliver training in online tools to up to 200,000 teachers through a series of workshops and resources. Meanwhile UNESCO will offer full access to its many digital education resources.
Shakur, who worked for Somali National Television (SNTV), was killed by an improvised explosive device while covering the operations of security forces against Al-Shabaab militia.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists
Working conditions must be improved

In low-income countries, the first obstacle is the heavy workload. According to a new UNESCO data, each primary teacher in these countries has an average of 52 pupils per class at primary level, while the global average is 26. The ratio is particularly high in sub-Saharan Africa – 56 pupils per teacher – and Southern Asia – 38. In Europe and North America there are only 15 pupils per teacher on average.

Supervision difficulties are amplified by a lack of training, which means that teachers do not always have all the tools at hand to succeed in the classroom. UNESCO data shows that about 26% of primary and 39% of secondary school teachers do not have the minimum qualification requirements in low-income countries, compared to respectively 14% and 16% globally.

In remote, underprivileged, and rural areas, conditions worsen and are exacerbated by multi-grade, multi-lingual and acute learning needs in the classroom.

Female teachers are affected disproportionately due to lack of adequate housing, long and unsafe routes to school and a lack of childcare services making it difficult to keep women in remote teaching posts. The underrepresentation of female teachers in certain knowledge areas, and in leadership positions is another ongoing challenge.
The three laureates selected by an international jury are “Apprendre en paix, Enseigner sans violence” from Graines de Paix in Benin, “TAMAM Project for School-Based Educational Reform” from the American University of Beirut, and "Training Teachers to Transform Haiti" from PH4 Global. An endowment of US $300,000 will be divided between the winners to help further their work in advancing innovative practices in the teaching profession.

The Prize-giving ceremony will be held at UNESCO headquarters, on October 5 at 11:30AM (Paris time), on the occasion of World Teachers' Day. It will be followed by a panel discussion with this year’s Laureates, which will focus on the need for bold action to be taken by decision-makers, for all stakeholders to support teachers everywhere, and for recognition of the critical role of teachers in shaping the future of education.
In the Declaration, the fruit of ten months of multilateral negotiations led by UNESCO, States affirm for the first time that culture is a “global public good”. Consequently, States call for culture to be included “as a specific objective in its own right” among the next United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.

The text defines a set of cultural rights that need to be taken into account in public policies, ranging from the social and economic rights of artists, to artistic freedom, the right of indigenous communities to safeguard and transmit their ancestral knowledge, and the protection and promotion of cultural and natural heritage.

It also calls for substantial regulation of the digital sector, notably of the major platforms, for the benefit of online cultural diversity, artists’ intellectual property rights and fair access to content for all.
The World rallies for culture

Forty years after MONDIACULT 1982, UNESCO is bringing together representatives of its 193 Member States to draw a global roadmap for cultural policies. The event will be opened on Wednesday 28 September at 10 am (local time) by Audrey Azoulay, Director-General of UNESCO, and Andrés Manuel López Obrador, President of the United Mexican States. Nearly 160 ministers of culture will take part in the debates.

Decisive Declaration expected

Important multilateral negotiations have been taking place over a year under the aegis of UNESCO with a view to the adoption by the ministers of a joint declaration that will address all aspects of cultural policies in the light of contemporary challenges.

The Declaration will not only define the values but also the common priorities of the international community for culture. It is expected to give official recognition to culture as a “global public good.” UNESCO Member States are also slated to commit to a common body of cultural rights and the text of the Declaration should lead to advances in key areas such as the fight against illicit trafficking in cultural goods and the regulation of digital platforms.

Issues such as the status of the artist, freedom of expression, sustainable cultural tourism and the restitution of cultural goods will also be at the heart of the debate.

The adoption of the Declaration will take place on Friday 30 September at around 12.45 (local time).

Measuring the role of culture in society

On the occasion of the Conference, UNESCO will also unveil the Culture|2030 benchmark of 22 indicators concerning four thematic areas, making it possible to measure the societal contribution of culture to environmental protection, education, gender equality, and economic growth.
It is reported that the AI market in India is expected to reach US$7.8 billion by 2025 at the rate of 20.2 per cent compound annual growth. To align India’s curriculum to the 21st century and to prepare the students for the AI economy, India’s National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 lays profound emphasis on the need to impart the necessary technical knowledge at all levels of education. It emphasizes the integration of AI in Education to also promote quality and skill-based education.

With this Report, UNESCO offers a glimpse of the varied dimensions and suggestions for future uses of Artificial Intelligence in the school setting. We hope this publication will serve as a useful reference tool for enhancing and influencing programmes and policies related to technology and, in particular to Artificial Intelligence; while at the same time, never losing the focus that all technology should be human-centered and benefit the greater interest of humanity.

In line with the national vision of Digital India, the report concludes with a set of ten action-oriented recommendations that we hope will catalyze India’s transformational journey through technological education and advanced tech-driven solutions in the educational processes.

The ten recommendations are:

Consider the ethics of Artificial Intelligence in Education as an utmost priority

Rapidly provide an overall regulatory framework for Artificial Intelligence in Education

Create effective public-private partnerships

Ensure that all students and teachers have access to the latest technology

Expand AI literacy efforts

Attempt to correct algorithmic biases and the resulting discrimination

Improve public trust in Artificial Intelligence

Request the private sector to better involve students and educationists in developing AI products

Place ownership of data with the students

Embrace the versatility of Artificial Intelligence in Education systems

The substance of the Report has been developed by an expert team of researchers under the guidance of the UNESCO New Delhi Office. The Office extends its gratitude to Intel India and Vantage for their timely support and cooperation.

To illustrate the report, the following audio-visual package is also available free of copyright:

1. Summary video underlining the recommendations of the Report

2. Words from the Author

3. Thematic videos:

_________________

Note to the Editors

UNESCO’s mandate calls inherently for a human-centred approach to AI. UNESCO has developed within the framework of the Beijing Consensus a publication aimed at fostering the readiness of education policy-makers in artificial intelligence. This publication, Artificial Intelligence and Education: Guidance for Policy-makers, will be of interest to practitioners and professionals in the policy-making and education communities.



The Artificial Intelligence and the Futures of Learning project builds on the Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence that was adopted at the 41st session of the UNESCO General Conference.

Previous editions

• N for Nose: State of the Education Report for India, 2019

• Vocational Education First: State of the Education Report for India, 2020

• No Teacher, No Class: State of the Education Report for India, 2021

About UNESCO

UNESCO is the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. It seeks to build peace through international cooperation in Education, the Sciences and Culture. UNESCO's programmes contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals defined in Agenda 2030, adopted by the UN General Assembly in 2015.

In this spirit, UNESCO develops educational tools to help people live as global citizens free of hate and intolerance. UNESCO works so that each child and citizen has access to quality education. By promoting cultural heritage and the equal dignity of all cultures, UNESCO strengthens bonds among nations. UNESCO fosters scientific programmes and policies as platforms for development and cooperation. UNESCO stands up for freedom of expression, as a fundamental right and a key condition for democracy and development. Serving as a laboratory of ideas, UNESCO helps countries adopt international standards and manages programmes that foster the free flow of ideas and knowledge sharing.

Follow UNESCO New Delhi on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram

For more information, please contact:

Joyce Poan, Programme Specialist and Chief of Education

E-mail: j.poan@unesco.org

Rekha Beri, Information Officer

E-mail: r.beri@unesco.org
The 7 projects to be implemented from now through the end of the year are part of UNESCO’s larger efforts in support of the culture sector in Ukraine.

The UN Organization has deployed numerous emergency measures since 24 February 2022 when Russian offensive against Ukraine began, and continues to identify the needs on the ground to support the cultural sector as much as possible, as well as the education sector and freedom of the press, in accordance with its mandate.
Charles and Latigue, reporters for online media outlets FS News and Tijèn Journalis, respectively, were shot dead while reporting on gang violence in Cité Soleil, in the Haitian capital Port-au-Prince. They were among seven reporters to come under attack, five of whom were able to escape.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists
The Transforming Education Summit, led by the UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, has been convened in the wake of the largest disruption to education on record, triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic, which set back progress on inclusion, quality and relevance even further.

UNESCO data shows that worldwide, 244M children and youth are still out of school. It is estimated that, globally, 6 out of every 10 children are unable to understand a simple text by the age of ten. In this context, the UN Sustainable Development Goal of quality education for all by 2030 (SDG4) is at risk of not being achieved.

At the same time, an unprecedented global consultation with over 1 million stakeholders led by UNESCO on the Futures of Education has demonstrated the urgent need to adapt education to the new challenges of the century. To respond to the climate disruption, the technological revolution, the resurgence of conflicts and social inequalities, education must also be transformed.

The Transforming Education Summit should be an accelerator of global mobilization, with the announcement by States of new strong commitments.
Mr Coronel Godoy was shot dead as he was leaving the premises of Radio Amambay where he worked. The journalist had been receiving threats since June this year.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists
German, a respected veteran news reporter who covered topics such as organized crime and corruption for the Review-Journal, was stabbed fatally in an altercation outside his home.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists
She will renew this call at the Transforming Education Summit to be held on September 19 convened by the UN Secretary General, which will bring together Heads of State and Governments.

The gender gap is closing

The new UNESCO estimates confirm that the difference in the rate of girls and boys out of school has closed worldwide. The gaps of 2.5 percentage points among primary school age children worldwide and of 3.9 percentage points among upper secondary school age youth in 2000 have been reduced to zero – however, regional disparities persist.

New method for more reliable figures

Multiple data sources – including information from surveys and censuses – have been cross-referenced by UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS) and the Global Education Monitoring (GEM) Report experts, in order that the figures reflect reality as closely as possible. It is the first time that this methodology, previously used to estimate flagship health indicators, has been used in education, marking a significant improvement in the robustness of the estimates.

Important data gaps have been filled in countries that have large out of school numbers but where no administrative data of good quality has been available for over a decade, such as Nigeria which has an estimated 20.2 million children and youth out of school, Ethiopia (10.5 million), the Democratic Republic of Congo (5.9 million) and Kenya (1.8 million).

With UNESCO’s help, 90% of countries have now set national benchmarks to assess progress towards quality education for all by 2030, including on out-of-school rates.
150,000 USD from the World Heritage Fund to support recovery and prevention measures at Moenjodaro and Thatta World Heritage sites, including long-term mitigation of the impact of natural disasters.

200,000 USD from the Heritage Emergency Fund for cultural heritage, cultural practices and intangible heritage elements at risk in the Balochistan, Swat and Larkana districts.

Cultural practices, such as crafts and music, which are often an important source of income, have also been severely disrupted. The UNESCO foreseen activities will aim to support not only the national response plans but also the knowledge bearers, artisans, crafts people and artists who have lost their livelihoods due to the floods on the other.

The UNESCO office in Islamabad is also working with the authorities of Pakistan to rapidly provide distance learning solutions to ensure continuity of education. UNESCO headquarters has already mobilized 50,000 USD to finance the actions will be implemented, in particular in the province of Sindh.
Press release

European Heritage Days: UNESCO celebrates 50 years of World Heritage

On the occasion of European Heritage Days, UNESCO will open its doors to the public on Saturday 17 and Sunday 18 September 2022, from 10 am to 6 pm. This year’s edition will be marked by the 50th anniversary of the World Heritage Convention and will feature a unique exhibition by contemporary painter Sacha Jafri.
Over the past two years, despite the difficulties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the teaching and learning process has not been interrupted, and continuation of education was ensured through distance learning, noted the UNESCO office in Vietnam.

Deputy Minister Ngo Thi Minh expressed her “great pleasure at the visit of Audrey Azoulay, UNESCO Director-General, which coincided with the start of the new school year, and at being able to attend the opening ceremony in person rather than online, as Hanoi and many other cities had to do the previous year”. Deputy Minister Ngo Thi Minh stated that “the government's right decisions and the efforts of the whole education sector enabled Vietnam's education system to remain strong during the pandemic, turning the problems of the COVID-19 pandemic into an opportunity to innovate and transform education, particularly in the area of using technology in teaching and learning, and to accelerate digital transformation in education”.

The Vietnamese authorities want to further amplify their efforts, as they explained today to the Director-General of UNESCO when presenting their new Education Development Strategic Plan for 2030, and the national commitment that Vietnam will present at the Transforming Education Summit.

Vietnam today announced its commitment to:

Ensure that education expenditure accounts for at least 20% of total government expenditure. Gradually exempt families from tuition fees in early childhood and lower secondary education. Invest in specialized facilities for educational institutions in remote, mountainous and island areas. Increase investments in higher education institutions, research and innovation.

The strategy also includes strengthening the Education Sector’s governance system and the teaching career, developing dynamic and flexible schools that respond to the needs of young people, and promoting technology and digitalization in education.
High resolution mapping for the first time

The archaeologists led a survey using two different robots, or, Remotely Operated Vehicles, adapting to the geographical and morphological submerged areas. The robot Arthur, designed especially for archaeological surveys in deep waters, was used to document shipwrecks on the Italian continental shelf.

Arthur documented 3 roman shipwrecks discovered by the American expeditions (Ballard-McCann) in the 1990s. Archaeologists were happy to find that the state of conservation of these shipwrecks and artefacts is almost the same as it was nearly 30 years ago; they have not been impacted by sedimentation, bioerosion or human activities (fishing nets, etc.).

The new data collected allows for higher resolution photos and videos that help to characterize and date the ships’ cargo. Documenting these sites, has uncovered substantial new evidence.

3 new shipwrecks documented

On the Tunisian continental shelf, the archaeologists used the robot Hilarion to verify and document the targets of the newly mapped area. The seabed was also explored with multibeam sonar to give more information about this area, which is unknown and dangerous for navigation, and on the potential location of other archaeological remains.

The area around the Keith Reef was scanned for the first time in order to produce a detailed map showing the traces of underwater cultural heritage. This allowed the scientific and technical team to document 3 new shipwrecks dating from the Ancient to the Modern period (C19th), as well as several other areas of archaeological interest.

What’s next?

This Autumn, the archaeologists will meet at UNESCO to unveil their preliminary findings. A full, detailed report will be presented at a later date. This is the first step in a lasting relationship of multilateral cooperation in the Mediterranean.

The archaeologists plan to process the photogrammetry of the revisited wrecks located on the Italian continental shelf, using the video taken by the robots and recommend continuing the mapping of the Skerki Bank area on the Tunisian continental shelf. They also want to organize several activities such as a scientific conference, follow-up missions and a reflection on the protection of these sites.

This multilateral mission is both an opportunity and an example to be shared with other countries as a best practice for the study, protection and promotion of underwater cultural heritage in international waters.
The new members are:

Africa

Arab States

Asia and the Pacific

Europe and North America

Latin America and the Caribbean

The new UNESCO learning cities were added to the network following their nomination by the National Commissions for UNESCO in the concerned countries and the recommendations of a jury of experts. A strong commitment to lifelong learning by the mayor and city administration and a track record of good practices and policy initiatives are key prerequisites for becoming a learning city.

The 77 new members bring the total number of cities within the UNESCO GNLC to 294 in 76 countries.

About UNESCO learning cities

Connecting education, training and cultural institutions and engaging a wide range of partners such as public-sector representatives, civil society organizations and employers is a key feature of UNESCO learning cities. They effectively mobilize resources in every sector to promote inclusive and quality learning, from basic to higher education. They revitalize learning in families and communities and facilitate learning for and in the workplace while extending the use of modern learning technologies.

Further information
The awards will be presented during an international conference in Abidjan (Côte d’Ivoire), on 8 and 9 September 2022, under the theme “Transforming literacy learning spaces”. A special session focusing on efforts that transform literacy learning spaces will be held with the laureates on 9 September from 2.40pm to 3.35pm CET.

UNESCO King Sejong Literacy Prize

The UNESCO King Sejong Literacy Prize, sponsored by the Government of the Republic of Korea, recognizes contributions to mother language-based literacy development. It will be awarded to:

‘Native Scientist’ programme of Native Scientist, United Kingdom. ‘Native Scientist’ is a non-profit organisation working to foster scientific literacy and language development among marginalized children and adolescents by creating meaningful connections between students and scientists across Europe. The programme connects migrant children with international professionals experienced on Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics and Medicine (STEMM), who share a common cultural heritage and the same native language as the learners.

‘Native Scientist’ is a non-profit organisation working to foster scientific literacy and language development among marginalized children and adolescents by creating meaningful connections between students and scientists across Europe. The programme connects migrant children with international professionals experienced on Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics and Medicine (STEMM), who share a common cultural heritage and the same native language as the learners. ‘Mother Tongue Based Multilingual Education’ programme of Kalinga Institute of Social Sciences, India. The programme aims to tackle the challenges of poor retention of indigenous students in elementary schools due to classroom language barriers and teachers' incapacity to deal with multilingual and multicultural classrooms effectively. The programme is in a hybrid format with face-to-face and distance learning modules using low-tech solutions such as television, radio, and text messaging.

programme aims to tackle the challenges of poor retention of indigenous students in elementary schools due to classroom language barriers and teachers' incapacity to deal with multilingual and multicultural classrooms effectively. The programme is in a hybrid format with face-to-face and distance learning modules using low-tech solutions such as television, radio, and text messaging. ‘Madrasa Arabic lessons’ programme of Madrasa, United Arab Emirates. Madrasa is a leading e-learning platform launched in 2018 to respond to the need to develop and enrich Arabic educational content and make it accessible to students. The ‘Madrasa Arabic lessons’ programme aims to provide basic literacy skills in the Arabic language by collaborating with a committee of experts and transforming traditional learning methods into an interactive and engaging format.

Each of the three UNESCO King Sejong laureates will receive a medal, a diploma and an endowment of US$ 20.000.

UNESCO Confucius Prize for Literacy

The UNESCO Confucius Prize for Literacy, sponsored by the Government of the People’s Republic of China, recognizes contributions to functional literacy leveraging technological environments in support of adults in rural areas and out-of-school youth. It will be awarded to:

‘Accessible Literature’ (Literatura Acessível) programme of Institute Include, Brazil. Institute Include aims to promote inclusion and social participation of people with disabilities through education, sport, and culture. The programme is an initiative that produces, reproduces and launches books in multiple formats, which includes simple reading in braille, Libras (Brazilian sign language), audio description, and pictograms. The programme has enrolled 2,022 learners, 55% of whom are girls and women.

‘People Accessible Network for Digital Empowerment and Inclusivity (PANDei)’ programme of Sarawak State Library, Malaysia. With local government support, the programme aims to help build a comprehensive support network, empowering local communities’ digital competencies and skills for building a digital-ready community. From 2018 to 2022, 81,057 learners benefitted from the programme, which also helped train 54 facilitators and teachers through two Train of Trainer (ToT) activities.

'School Readiness through Community Participation' programme of The Molteno Institute for Language and Literacy, South Africa. The programme aims to equip children, schools and communities to prepare Grade R (Reception Year) learners for formal schooling. Furthermore, the programme enables school readiness by involving local communities and parents through local languages in the context of underserved school communities of rural South Africa.

Each of the three UNESCO Confucius laureates will receive a medal, a diploma and an endowment of US$ 30.000.
Since the beginning of the war, UNESCO has been deploying emergency measures in Ukraine as part of its mandate for education, culture, science, information and communication. The Organization has mobilized close to $7 million to date, provided numerous in-kind grants and made its experts available to advise professionals on the ground.

A working meeting was held at UNESCO Headquarters on Tuesday between Ms Azoulay, UNESCO Director-General, Mr Tkachenko, Ukrainian Minister of Culture and Information, and Ernesto Ottone, UNESCO Assistant Director-General for Culture, to ensure the proper implementation of these actions in the field of culture. On this occasion, the Minister also expressed new needs which UNESCO is committed to meet.

Inscription of Odesa on the World Heritage List

Oleksandr Tkachenko announced Ukraine’s decision to submit t the nomination of the Historic Centre of Odesa for inscription on UNESCO’s World Heritage List. Nationally recognized and protected, this site is located only a few dozen kilometres from the front line and has already been struck by artillery fire. On 24 July 2022, part of the large glass roof and windows of Odesa’s Museum of Fine Arts, inaugurated in 1899, were destroyed.

At the request of Ukraine, UNESCO has already mobilized international experts to provide technical support to the country so that this nomination can be examined urgently by Member States sitting on the World Heritage Committee, with a view of inscribing it on the World Heritage List and on the List of World Heritage in Danger.

The World Heritage Committee will also be recommended to add UNESCO’s World Heritage sites of Kyiv and L’viv, which are also under threat, to the List of World Heritage in Danger.

UNESCO completes its emergency measures on the ground

In parallel to these steps and in view of the new needs expressed by professionals in the field, the Director-General announced at this meeting that UNESCO would strengthen its support to the city of Odesa by providing:

Funding to repair the damage inflicted on the Odesa Museum of Fine Arts and the Odesa Museum of Modern Art since the beginning of the war, and to finance the hiring of additional staff dedicated to the protection of collections. Support for the digitization of at least 1,000 works of art in Odesa as well as the documentary collection of the Odesa State Archives, through the provision of appropriate hardware. New equipment to the Odesa Regional Administration for the in situ protection of cultural property: protective panels, sandbags, fire extinguishers, fireproof fabrics and gas masks will be delivered to the Department of Culture, Religion and Protection of Architectural Heritage. They will allow the recovery of public monuments and sculptures, which has been underway since the beginning of the war, to continue.

With a view to boosting the recovery of Ukraine’s cultural sector, the Director-General also offered the Organization’s support for the creation of a UNESCO Cultural Centre in L’viv, as requested by the city mayor. It would be a place for artists to meet and share experiences, and would host training programmes, various activities and events. A budget of $1.5 million has already been earmarked to finance its opening and operational costs over several months.

In addition, the Director-General of UNESCO decided to deploy a liaison officer in Kyiv to coordinate these actions. The officer will complement the team of local experts already working in the field.

Read also:

Media Contacts:
“I condemn the killing of Dilia Contreras and Leiner Montero Ortega,” said the Director-General. “The criminal use of violence to silence journalists has a devastating effect on freedom of expression. I call on the authorities to undertake an effective investigation to uncover the motives behind this crime and bring those responsible to justice.”

Contreras, director of the digital platform La Bocina and reporter for RCN Radio and Voces 89.4, and Montero, director of the radio station Sol Digital Stereo, were shot dead as they were returning home after reporting on festivities in nearby Santa Rosa de Lima. A third journalist and passenger travelling in the same car was also wounded.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact:
The Rare Books and Special Collections Library

Founded in 1919, the American University in Cairo (AUC) became actively involved in the preservation of cultural heritage in the 1950s, when it acquired the collection of Sir Keppel Archibald Cameron Creswell, a pioneer in the study of Islamic art and architecture. It has since continued collecting and preserving rare books, drawings, and other documentary heritage, including, to name but a few, the papers, plans and artefacts of notable Egyptian architect Hassan Fathy, the Van Leo Photographic Collection and documents pertaining to the history of Egyptian women and society.

The University’s Rare Books and Special Collections Library has a conservation laboratory and digitization center, contributing to its important work in preserving Egyptian documentary heritage and making it accessible to scholars, students, and the public. By supporting research and collaborating with other institutions in Egypt and beyond, the Library has become an indispensable research hub for Arabic and African countries.

Speaking of the role of libraries at universities and learning institutions in the preservation and sharing documentary heritage, Heba Sayed, AUC’s Director of Planning Assessment and Business Development, pledged “AUC-LLT-RBSCL will continue to work arduously to identify, keep, preserve and share the records and the story of those that have contributed to changing the world that many times are underrepresented in the mainstream historical record.”
A contributor to several local print media, Mr Román edited and directed La Realidad newspaper and broadcast a news programme on social media. He was shot dead as he left home just hours after publishing an article online about the disappearance of 43 students in Ayotzinapa in 2014.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also:
Juan Arjón López, founder and editor of the A Qué Le Temes Facebook news page, had been missing since early August. He is reported to have died from a violent blow to the head.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also:
The four media workers were carrying out a promotional broadcast from a mobile radio unit outside a restaurant, when assailants burst into the restaurant and began shooting customers before turning to the mobile unit.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
About the Félix Houphouët-Boigny-UNESCO Peace Prize

Created in 1989, this annual Prize honours an individual, an institution, or a private or public body which has significantly contributed to the promotion, research, safeguarding or maintenance of peace, in accordance with the United Nations Charter and the Constitution of UNESCO. World-renowned figures have received it, including Nelson Mandela, Frederik W. De Klerk, and Jimmy Carter, who was awarded the prize for his work in the field of education.
Do Cong Duong was a video blogger known for his reports about corruption and land seizures on the Tieng Dan TV Facebook page. He was serving an 8-year prison sentence following his arrest in January 2018.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Director of the digital television channel Ola Manta TV, Delgado was shot dead in his car in the presence of his young daughter, who survived the attack unharmed.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Aye Kyaw, the owner of the Sagaing city Harman Photography studio and a member of the Upper Myanmar Photography Association, documented protests and opposition activities. He was arrested when a police convoy arrived at his house looking for weapons, although none were found. Aye Kyaw died in police custody some ten hours later.

In September 2020, UNESCO released a report on Safety of Journalists Covering Protests – Preserving Freedom of the Press During Times of Civil Unrest, sounding the alarm regarding the global surge in attacks against journalists covering protests.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Méndez, who directed and wrote for online platform Tu Voz, was killed when an armed group opened fire in a public location. The journalist had also been a contributor to the Zona Franca news website and the El Correo newspaper. This is the 12th journalist killing in Mexico condemned by the Director-General of UNESCO so far in 2022.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Sodharo, who worked for Sindhi weekly Chinag, was shot outside his home and died in hospital from the injuries sustained during the attack.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Forty years after the first edition of MONDIACULT, UNESCO is bringing together representatives of its 193 Member States, including some 100 ministers of culture, at the end of September for a world conference dedicated to cultural policies.

The event, which will be opened by Audrey Azoulay, Director-General of UNESCO, aims to affirm culture as a "global public good", as the foundation of our common humanity, and to define the future of public policies in this field.

As the world gradually turns the page on the COVID19 pandemic, culture has a major role to play in the development of our societies, the reduction of inequalities, and the empowerment and well-being of individuals.

According to UNESCO figures, the cultural and creative sector is also a powerful economic driver: it represents more than 48 million jobs worldwide (6.2% of all existing jobs) and 3.1% of the global GDP. It is also the sector that employs and provides opportunities for the largest number of young adults under the age of 30.

MONDIACULT 2022, organised by UNESCO with the support of Mexico, aims to respond to the major contemporary challenges around four areas of debate:

How to revitalize and strengthen cultural policies?

What place for culture in sustainable development?

How to respond to crises affecting heritage and cultural diversity?

What future for the creative economy?

Topics such as the fight against illicit trafficking in cultural goods, the return of works to their countries of origin, the status of the artist, freedom of expression, the digital revolution, sustainable cultural tourism and the role of culture in protecting the climate will be at the heart of the discussions.

The ministers of culture are slated to adopt a joint declaration at the end of the debate.

Prior accreditation required at here

More information here
Hangi, a radio technician for the Nyiragongo-based Soleil Levant community radio, was shot dead outside his workplace on 17 July in Nyiragongo in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
In 2018, UNESCO launched a flagship initiative to Revive the Spirit of Mosul, the UAE was the first funder and partner dedicating 50.4 million USD. After heavy preparatory work – documentation, demining, site clearance and rubble removal including cleaning and storage of rubble with historic value for their reuse, consolidation, surveys, public consultation, field and soil investigations, archaeological excavations, executive designs – the iconic monuments of the old city are now being rebuilt.

Today, UNESCO and the UAE unveil the visuals of the Al-Nouri Mosque and Al-Hadba minaret, as they will be in 2024, after the completion of the reconstruction works: the prayer hall and the minaret rebuilt as they were, places of prayer and landmarks for the whole population of the city, and the functional buildings improved to meet the needs of the religious authorities and the faithful.
UNESCO and the World Book Capital Advisory Committee were impressed by Strasbourg’s strong focus on books to meet the challenges of social tensions and climate change, with programs like 'Reading for the Planet’. The city emphasizes books’ ability to encourage debate and discussion of environmental concerns and scientific knowledge, focusing on young people as agents of change.

Strasbourg was also commended for its literary heritage and the activities it organized highlighting many artistic disciplines, from music, to theatre and illustration. The city has significant experience of organising large-scale outward-looking events.

The year of celebrations will start on 23 April 2024, on World Book and Copyright Day.
Rubel was acting director of the privately owned Kushtiar Khabar newspaper and editor of the privately owned CrimeVisionBD.com news website. Focusing on politics, crime and social issues, he also worked for another private newspaper, Amader Notun Shomoy. He had been missing since 3 July.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
As part of their plan to counter the denial and distortion of the Holocaust, UNESCO and the United Nations sought to objectively measure the extent of these phenomena on social networks, in partnership with the World Jewish Congress. They commissioned researchers from the Oxford Internet Institute to identify and analyze 4,000 posts related to the Holocaust, on five major platforms: Facebook, Instagram, Telegram, TikTok and Twitter.

The report demonstrates that Holocaust denial and distortion is massive on Telegram, a platform known for its lack of moderation and clear user guidelines . Nearly half (49%) of Holocaust-related public content on this platform denies or distorts the facts. This rate rises to over 80% for messages in German, and around 50% in English and French. These posts, easily accessible to people looking for Holocaust-related information on the platform, are often explicitly antisemitic.

On moderated platforms, denial and distortion are also present, but to a lesser extent. They concern 19% of Holocaust-related content on Twitter, 17% on TikTok, 8% on Facebook and 3% on Instagram. But the falsification of the facts about the Holocaust then takes on new forms: perpetrators learn to evade content moderation, by using humorous and parodic memes as a strategy intended to normalize antisemitic ideas, for example, making these ideas appear mainstream.
Farooqi, the correspondent of the Urdu-language 7 News channel in Khanewal district, was shot in the head when several assailants attacked the car he was travelling in with other media workers who escaped unharmed. Farooqi was rushed to hospital where he died of his injuries.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
Ahmed was a prominent journalist for the national Urdu-language Daily Express newspaper and the Express Newstelevision channel. Unidentified assailants shot him while he was headed from prayer at a mosque to his place of work.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
Federico “Ding” Gempesaw, a political commentator on privately owned local radio Radio Natin, was shot at close range by two masked gunmen outside of his home in the Carmen neighbourhood of Cagayan De Oro.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
De la Cruz, a reporter for the Expresso Press newspaper and several other publications, was shot in the presence of his family near their home. His daughter was seriously injured in the attack.

Antonio de la Cruz is the 11th journalist killed in Mexico since the beginning of the year.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
Ukrainian borscht - national version of borscht consumed in several countries of the region - is an integral part of Ukrainian family and community life. Festivals and cultural events are dedicated to it. In 2020, it was included in the national list of elements of intangible cultural heritage of Ukraine and was to be considered for inscription on the Representative List in the Committee’s 2023 cycle.

Due to the ongoing war and its negative impact on this tradition, Ukraine asked the Member States of the Committee to fast-track the examination of the nomination file for borscht to be inscribed on the List of Urgent Safeguarding as a case of extreme urgency, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the Convention. The Committee today approved this listing.
The question of resources is all the more important as education must also be transformed to meet the new challenges of the 21st century. As the recent UNESCO report on the Future of Education has shown, curricula and teaching must be adapted to issues such as the climate crisis and the digital revolution.

UN Summit in September

While there are many reasons for concern, the large-scale mobilization of governments this week at UNESCO gives cause for hope. More than 150 ministers and deputy ministers personally accepted the invitation and took part in the debates - the largest number ever to attend the Organization's headquarters. In their speeches, all of them underlined their determination to act, and to collaborate on new initiatives.

These two days of collective work have thus allowed us to sketch out many possible measures. The discussions will continue on 19 September in New York, during the Summit for the Transformation of Education, which will bring together heads of state and government: a major event convened by the United Nations Secretary-General aimed at putting education at the top of the international agenda.
Better understanding will lead to better protection

UNESCO's Director-General said the first priority was to "advance our state of knowledge". Oceanographic research accounts for an average of only 2% of national research budgets, while only 21% of the seabed is mapped. Yet this data is essential for understanding currents, and identifying fishery resources and geological hazards. UNESCO is committed to international efforts in this field. It aims to map at least 80% of the seabed by 2030.

The second priority is to better protect the ocean. "This means rapidly increasing the surface area of marine environments benefiting from safeguarding measures," advocated Audrey Azoulay. Thanks to UNESCO's world heritage sites, 20% of the world's blue carbon reserves are already protected: coral reefs, mangroves and seagrass beds that help limit climate change by storing massive amounts of CO2.

UNESCO also has more than 210,000 km² of biosphere zones: a programme devised in the 1970s, which, at the time, was a pioneering step towards sustainable development, and aims to achieve equilibrium between man and his environment. In the same spirit, the Organization safeguards indigenous traditions and know-how that must be passed on to the younger generations, particularly in the area of sustainable fishing.

Education as the keystone
A trail-blazing surfer

Maya Gabeira grew up in an environmentally engaged household, and understood the importance of climate issues from an early age. She started surfing aged 13 and turned pro by the time she was 17 years old. Preferring Big Waves over trick competitions, she has won the Billabong XXL Global Big Wave Awards five years in a row. The highlight of her career came in 2020 when she broke the Guinness World Record for the biggest wave ever surfed by a woman, at 22.4 metres.

After 15 years in close contact with the ocean, Maya Gabeira has witnessed first-hand the impact of climate change on the marine world, and believes it is urgent we tackle the climate crisis. She has a strong track record of leading successful activist campaigns. As a board member for the NGO Oceana, she supported an anti-plastic campaign in Brazil, which resulted in the country’s leading food delivery company taking bold action to tackle single-use plastic waste. She hopes to bring this expertise and drive to help achieve UNESCO’s climate goals.
Redefining the culture sector’s place on the public agenda

The end of the pandemic presents a significant opportunity to reposition culture on the public agenda and enhance its value as a global public good, says the report. It notes that the pandemic resulted in an enhanced recognition of the culture sector’s social value and contribution to collective and individual wellbeing, as well as to sustainable development. Indeed, in 2020, culture was included for the first time in the policy discussions of the G20 and the report argues that it is essential to grasp the global momentum.

Ernesto Ottone R. and HE Mohamed Khalifa Al Mubarak are launching this joint publication during a special event held today at Manarat Al Saadiyat in Abu Dhabi, a year after UNESCO and DCT announced their work on the global study. They will explore how the culture sector is not simply recovered but transformed, drawing on lessons learnt during the pandemic. The publication launch and event will also contribute to the preparation of the UNESCO World Conference on Cultural Policies and Sustainable Development – MONDIACULT 2022, which will take place in Mexico in late September 2022.

For UNESCO and DCT, this report represents the continuation of an ongoing collaboration on a series of strategic initiatives that support a joint commitment to advancing culture as a public good and protecting and promoting the diversity of cultural expressions to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030.
Mid-point in the Sustainable Development Goals Agenda

This is the moment to reverse the historical slide resulting from pandemic, climate and conflict disruptions, and to seek transformational changes around schooling, learning, teaching, technology, and financing of education.

This meeting comes at a critical time when government spending on education everywhere is not keeping up with the growing crisis in learning. An estimated 40 percent of low- and lower-middle income countries have reduced their spending on education with the onset of the pandemic in 2020, with an average decline in real spending of 13.5 percent. Further, in 2020, 43 bilateral donors decreased their aid to education, while households in the poorest countries are picking up 39% of the total cost of education compared to just 16% in high-income countries, according to a report released today by the World Bank, UNESCO’s Global Education Report and UNESCO’s Institute for Statistics.

As the world slowly and painfully emerges from the devastating COVID-19 pandemic, which deeply affected education, and exactly midway through the 15-year period allocated to reach the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the time is right to take stock of where the world is with the Sustainable Education Goal—and to act.

The pre-summit aims to prioritize quality education as a global public good, just like clean air and water, health and safety.
Emergency measures still being implemented

From the outset of the war, UNESCO's Director-General initiated a series of emergency measures to prevent as much destruction as possible. The Organization provided technical advice to cultural professionals in the field to protect buildings and inventory works, shelters were identified to secure objects that could be moved, and fire-fighting measures were reinforced.

UNESCO also assisted the Ukrainian authorities in marking cultural sites with the distinctive blue shield emblem. This symbol indicates that the property is protected under the 1954 Hague Convention. Therefore, any infringement is considered a violation of international law and can be prosecuted. It should also be noted that none of the 7 UNESCO World Heritage sites have been affected to date.
UNESCO leads the UN Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development from 2021 to 2030. In this context, several international summits are organized this year to amplify the international mobilisation for the ocean, the most important of which is the UN Ocean Conference, from 27 June to 1 July, in Lisbon, Portugal.

At this conference, UNESCO’s Director General will announce an ambitious new commitment: the global deployment of the "Tsunami ready" program, which will result in the training of all at-risk coastal communities in the event of a tsunami by 2030.
Al-Haidari worked for Japan’s public broadcaster NHK. Reports suggest two unidentified passengers in his car were also killed in the blast.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
The laureates will be awarded during a ceremony on 24 June at UNESCO Headquarters, together with the four laureates from the 2020 and 2019 editions.

The 2021 edition is dedicated to a theme whose importance has been highlighted by COVID-19. It rewards projects that have used technology to build learning programmes that effectively ensure the continuity and quality of learning in the face of education disruptions.

The International Jury reviewed 111 nominations submitted by 58 UNESCO Member States and eight NGOs in official relations with UNESCO, and recommended the two projects to recognize their achievements in harnessing technologies to serve education by adopting a variety of digital solutions, providing adaptable and high-quality content, and reaching a large scale of learners, especially the disadvantaged communities.

The Central Institute of Educational Technology (CIET), National Council for Educational Research and Training from India has reinforced a series of programmes during COVID-19 to ensure the continuity and quality of education, reaching over 1.5 million schools, 240 million students, and 8.5 million teachers. The digital learning programmes were made accessible by diverse media including TV and radio, and online platforms for students, teachers and educational administrators. The initiatives enabled flexible and personalized learning, while considering the special needs of students with disabilities and students in rural areas in India.

The digital educational programme of Ubongo, launched in Tanzania in 2014, has released more than 300 TV and radio files in 8 local languages across 18 countries in sub-Saharan Africa, with an aim to bring effective and localized learning to school-age children and their parents by leveraging the power of entertainment, technologies. As one of the biggest educational entertainment initiatives in Africa, Ubongo shows the ability to develop, adapt and distribute new content to support disruptive learning environments, home-based learning and context-specific education, such as for refugees and kids recovering from traumas.

Established in 2005 and supported by the Kingdom of Bahrain, the Prize rewards every year individuals and organizations that enhance teaching, learning and overall education performance.
Phillips, a freelance British journalist specializing in environmental affairs, worked for international media including The Guardian, Financial Times, Washington Post, and New York Times. He was returning from a work trip with Pereira, a Brazilian expert on isolated tribes in the Amazon, when they went missing. They had reportedly received threats the day before leaving.

Last year, UNESCO published a policy brief on the safety of foreign correspondents to raise attention to the specific risks and threats they face.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
The Aeolian Islands archipelago in Italy is a UNESCO World Heritage Site known for its intense volcanic activity. On 13 May, the Stromboli volcano experienced another major explosion that generated a thick cloud of smoke and landslides that reached the sea.

While this surface eruption was highly visible, most of the world's volcanic activity is actually hidden from view. More than a million volcanoes are underwater, generating 80% of the world’s volcanic activity.

As part of the Decade for Ocean Science (2021-2030), coordinated by UNESCO, a "UNESCO - 1 Ocean" exploration mission led by photographer-explorer Alexis Rosenfeld conducted an underwater exploratory mission in early June not far from Stromboli, off the island of Panarea, to shed light on the activity of underwater volcanoes.
Two extensions

El Hierro Biosphere Reserve (Spain)

Located on the island of El Hierro in the Canary Islands archipelago, this biosphere reserve is home to almost 11,000 inhabitants. It has expanded its marine area, increasing the total surface area of the biosphere reserve to 58,598.60 ha. Located in the Macaronesian biogeographic region, El Hierro was able to become entirely self-sufficient in energy in 2014, thanks to its hybrid hydro-wind electricity generation system.



Sierra del Rincón Biosphere Reserve (Spain)

The transition zone of this biosphere reserve has been enlarged by 2.5% to attain a surface area of 16,091.7 ha. This extension includes the entire municipality of Madarcos, which is historically and ecologically related to the five municipalities that currently make up the biosphere reserve. This extension ensures the protection of the area’s rich biodiversity, especially its ornithological richness, and the associated cultural heritage. Enlargement should also reinforce efforts to foster socio-economic development in the region, especially in the field of sustainable tourism.
UNESCO steps up its emergency response

The programme complements the range of emergency measures already deployed by UNESCO since the beginning of the war to safeguard tangible and intangible cultural heritage, secure museum collections and combat illicit trafficking in cultural property.

Moreover, since the beginning of the war in Ukraine, UNESCO has been monitoring the situation of artists in close consultation with artists' networks and cultural actors in the country. This work is also carried out in coordination with international organizations involved in supporting artists at risk: PEN America's Artists at Risk Connection, Artists at Risk (AR)/ Perpetuum Mobile, ICORN, Freemuse, Prince Claus Fund and the PAUSE programme.

The UNESCO programme supporting the continuation of artistic creation and access to cultural life in Ukraine was supported by the UNESCO Heritage Emergency Fund. We wish to thank its donors: the Qatar Fund for Development, the Government of Canada, the Kingdom of Norway, the French Republic, the Principality of Monaco, ANA Holdings INC., the Republic of Estonia, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Slovak Republic, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Principality of Andorra, and the Republic of Serbia.
Adopted at the age of 3 in China, Xueli Abbing grew up in the Netherlands. As a teenager, she began a career as a model and worked with renowned photographers and designers.

Xueli Abbing has albinism, a genetic condition caused by a deficiency in melanin production that results in hypopigmentation. Alongside her career, she is dedicated to opposing stereotyping in the fashion industry and beyond, and advocating against the mistreatment of people with albinism around the world.

She uses her fame to change attitudes so that albinism, like other particularities, cease to seen as a curse. She builds on her experience to deliver a message of hope and works to make her story a source of inspiration for all people who are perceived as different.

UNESCO and Xueli Abbing share the conviction that diversity is valuable and that, under all circumstances and in all places, every individual must be able to reveal their full potential.

By becoming a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador for the fight against discrimination and racism, Xueli Abbing will commit to putting her experience, talent and reputation at the service of the Organization’s values.

On the basis of a roadmap to be entrusted to her by the Director-General of UNESCO, she will carry out actions to raise international awareness of human rights and the dignity of the most vulnerable, particularly people with albinism.
For this reason, UNESCO decided to launch a programme dedicated to Ukrainian women artists in exile, born of a partnership with the NGO Perpetuum Mobile, initiator of the Artists at Risk platform, which brings together cultural institutions in over 15 countries.

The artists concerned will be supported for a minimum of three months by a cultural institution in their host country. They will be taken care of with their children in artistic residencies, and will benefit from support in terms of networking, visibility and the conception of new cultural projects.

The scheme will aim to provide them with the means to become autonomous by the end of their hosting period, whether they then choose to return to live in Ukraine or to settle permanently in their host country. UNESCO has already set aside $140,000 to finance the scheme, which should initially benefit some 30 artists and their children.
Avila was a journalist and cameraman for Metro radio and television whose staff are reported to have received threats due to the broadcaster’s editorial policy.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and by coordinating the implementation of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Mahto, a reporter with a local cable station City News, frequently posted his reports on Public App, a local smartphone-based video application, on which he had a significant following.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Countering the sidelining of women scientists

According to UNESCO recent data, the number of women pursuing scientific careers is increasing slightly, only one in three researchers is a woman globally.[1] In the research world, the glass ceiling persists: just 14%[2] of senior academic positions in Europe are held by women and just 4% of the Nobel prizes in science have been awarded to women.

Alexandra Palt, L’Oréal Chief Corporate Responsibility Officer and CEO of the Fondation L’Oréal, said: “During the COVID-19 pandemic we have seen how women scientists are essential to respond to existential threats to our health, to society, to the planet. But still they are invisibilized and often face tremendous obstacles during their careers and research studies. This situation is the result of systemic barriers, unconscious bias, self-censorship but also discrimination. This is not just a problem for women: this is a problem for research. To be relevant, research has to be inclusive and needs all its talents to be mobilized.”

According to Shamila Nair-Bedouelle, Assistant Director-General for Natural Sciences of UNESCO: “Many of the rising female talents being celebrated this year are excelling in fields that will be vital to decarbonizing our future, such as energy storage systems, hydrogen fuel systems and quantum optics, a field of study which is paving the way for more energy-efficient computers. Yet many of their peers working in similarly strategic fields are not getting the recognition that they deserve. UNESCO, as the UN agency in charge of science, which has made gender equality a priority, is determined to act to put an end to these inequalities. The L’Oréal-UNESCO For Women in Science partnership is a relevant example of positive action in this field, giving a voice and visibility to women scientists and to their achievements to meet the challenges of our century”.

Since its inception in 1998, the L’Oréal-UNESCO For Women in Science programme has honored and supported 3,900 women scientists. It continues to lobby for these women to receive the recognition that they deserve. These brilliant female researchers have contributed significantly to their respective scientific fields and to finding effective solutions to some of the most pressing and urgent challenges that we face as a global society. This year’s celebration will be a way to acclaim them for their life’s work and the many obstacles they have overcome.
Since the start of the war, UNESCO has been implementing a series of emergency measures to help protect journalists on the ground. In late April, the Organization also sent a mission of experts to support media professionals in Lviv.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
A reporter for local television Canal Señal 3 La Victoria, Sandoval was shot while covering demonstrations in the Chilean capital on 1May and remained hospitalized in a critical condition until her death.

In 2020, UNESCO published a Report on Safety of Journalists Covering Protests which highlighted an upward trend in attacks on journalists covering protests, posing a significant threat to media freedom and freedom of access to information.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
Through the launch of its new portal www.unesco.org, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation aims to better explain what it is and what it does. With its new visual identity and simplified architecture, this portal offers a completely redesigned user experience to tackle issues related to accessibility and transparency whilst also taking into consideration new types of use.

The modernisation of UNESCO’s digital ecosystem was carried out by a group of digital agencies following several international calls for tender which were launched from 2020 onwards.

From an editorial perspective, UNESCO’s work is now batched in eight themes: Education, Culture, Natural Sciences, Ocean, Social and Human Sciences, Communication and Information, as well as the two priorities on Africa and Gender Equality.

Each programme is presented on a summary page, accompanied by informative articles in which the user can learn about the latest news or even hear about stories of workers on the ground and experiences of UNESCO beneficiaries.
The round-table will notably be informed by UNESCO’s recent report, The Film Industry in Africa: Trends, Challenges and Opportunities for Growth, a ground breaking analysis of data on the film and audiovisual industries of 54 African countries. The report argues that strategic investments and policy reforms could help the African film industry develop rapidly: with benefits for local cultural life, for the promotion of the continent's rich culture worldwide and for the economy. The publication shows that the African film industry could potentially quadruple the number of jobs in the sector from 5 million people to 20 million.

Notable initiatives include the partnership between UNESCO and Netflix, Reinvented African folk tales, the UNESCO/Nara residency for young African female filmmakers, supervised by internationally acclaimed film director Naomi Kawase, and the African Film Heritage Project (AFHP), a joint initiative between the Martin Scorsese’s Film Foundation, Cineteca di Bologna, the Pan African Federation of Filmmakers (FEPACI) and UNESCO.

The event is organized as part of UNESCO’s enduring commitment to promoting African cinema through events such as the Pan African Film and Television Festival (FESPACO) in Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso), the Carthage film festival (Tunisia) and the Luxor African Film Festival (Egypt). It is organized with the support of the Government of the People's Republic of China.
Both reporters worked for local online portal El Veraz, which Yessenia Mollinedo Falconi also directed. Eleven journalists and media workers have been killed in Mexico so far this year, including 3 women journalists.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity
There are 235 million students enrolled in higher education worldwide, a number that has more than doubled in the last 20 years and will likely double again over the coming decade.

Faced with such growing demand, how can we ensure quality higher education that is adapted to contemporary challenges such as sustainable development? How can international academic mobility be supported? What lessons can be learned from the COVID-19 pandemic? These questions will be at the heart of the World Conference.

More than 1,500 participants are expected to attend the event coming from universities, governments, multilateral agencies, the private sector and civil society to share their experiences and ideas with a view to drawing a common global roadmap for the coming decade.

The Confeerence will be opened by UNESCO Director-General Audrey Azoulay, the Spanish Minister of Universities, Joan Subirats, the President of the Generalitat of Catalonia, Pere Aragonès, and the Mayor of Barcelona, Ada Colau.
Abu Akleh, a well-known Al Jazeera correspondent, was reporting in Jenin when she was fatally shot, despite the fact that she was wearing a jacket with the word “press” written on it.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
Founder of the online publication Fuentes Fidedignas, Ramirez also wrote a column for El Debate newspaper. His last column was published on 3 May, World Press Freedom Day. He had previously worked for national newspapers El Financiero, El Nacional and La Jornada.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
The Prize recognizes their strong commitment to the promotion of Arab culture around the world. Through their work, both women communicate on complex issues while keeping them accessible for a large audience. This capacity, along with their dedication to artistic excellence and social dialogue, has motivated the jury to select them as laureates of the Sharjah Prize.

The award ceremony will be held in Paris, at UNESCO Headquarters, on 30 May 2022.
Nezhyborets was a video technician for the television broadcaster Dytynets. Zamoysky was a freelance contributor to local news media including Information Portal and Hromada Priirpinnia who covered the war on his Facebook page. The exact dates of their killings are unclear.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
Deepening the debate on those still left behind, an annual UNESCO gender report, analysed data from 120 countries in primary and secondary education to offer a global picture. The findings show that in the early years, boys perform better than girls in mathematics but, this gender gap disappears later.

This research confirms that the gender gap in learning has closed even in the poorest countries. And in some countries, the gap is now reversed. For example, by grade 8, the gap is in favour of girls in mathematics by 7 percentage points in Malaysia, by 3 points in Cambodia, by 1.7 points in Congo and by 1.4 points in the Philippines.

However, biases and stereotypes are still likely to affect learning outcomes. Even though girls catch up in mathematics in upper primary and secondary education, boys are far more likely to be overrepresented among the highest performers in mathematics in all countries.

In middle- and high-income countries, girls in secondary school are scoring significantly higher in science. Despite this advantage, girls are still less likely to opt for scientific careers, indicating that gender biases could still be obstacles to the pursuit of further education in the science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields.
The Belarusian Association of Journalists (BAJ) was formed in 1995 as a non-governmental association of media workers with the objective of promoting freedom of expression and independent journalism in Belarus. It brings together over 1300 associated journalists, and is a member of the International Federation of Journalists (IFJ) and of the European Federation of Journalists (EFJ).

In August 2021, following the raiding by police of its offices in Belarus, the Supreme Court of Belarus ordered the dissolution of the organization, at the request of the country’s Ministry of Justice.
According to police, drug traffickers ambushed and killed Nayem, a reporter for local newspaper Dainik Cumillar Dak,near the border with India after promising to show him how drugs are smuggled across the frontier.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
Master classes, concerts, educational and other programmes worldwide

Earlier in the evening of 30 April (9 pm CET), UNESCO will celebrate the musical talent of women from across Africa with a second edition of its JazzWomenAfrica concert series. Organized in collaboration with the cultural agency ANYA Music (Morocco), JazzWomenAfrica helps counter the under-representation and insufficient recognition of women in the music industry. A discussion with women artists and music producers on this theme will take place on 29 April (5 pm CET). See dedicated page to access the debate.

A series of free, online education programmes will be presented via unesco.org, jazzday.com and the official International Jazz Day YouTube and Facebook pages. World-renowned jazz artists including multiple Grammy Award winners Arturo O’Farrill and Terri Lyne Carrington, Oran Etkin, Danny Grissett, Dan Tepfer and others will lead master classes and presentations.

Stakeholders across the UNESCO Creative Cities Network around the globe will organize their own celebrations throughout International Jazz Day.

Major support for International Jazz Day is provided by the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation. Air transportation and additional support for artists and educators is provided by United Airlines, the airline partner of International Jazz Day.

Established by UNESCO in 2011 at the initiative of UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador Herbie Hancock, and recognized by the United Nations General Assembly, International Jazz Day brings together countries and communities worldwide every 30 April.

The Herbie Hancock Institute of Jazz is UNESCO’s partner in the organization and promotion of International Jazz Day.
The success of UNESCO’s Resilient Reefs Initiative

This new large-scale plan will build on the successful Resilient Reefs Initiative launched by UNESCO and partners at the previous Our Ocean Summit in 2018. For the past four years, they have worked on 4 World Heritage reef pilot sites in Australia, Belize, France (New Caledonia) and Palau. The Resilient Reefs Initiative demonstrates that local pressures can be reduced through active intervention and that empowering local communities helps them to adapt their income and livelihoods to the changing realities.

For example, in the Southern Lagoon of the Rock Islands (Palau), the Resilient Reefs Initiative trains local rangers and communities in the latest science and skills in fisheries management, adaptation and resilience. The design of a fishing permit system to control access, the implementation of fish size limits to increase spawning biomass, and the protection of habitats ensuring the life history of species will all help to create the conditions in which fish stocks can rebound.

On Australia’s Ningaloo Coast, the Resilient Reefs Initiative is developing solutions to facilitate coral reproduction. When coral dies because of an event such as bleaching, bits break off and accumulate on the reef, creating a type of ‘rubble’ which prevents new coral from growing. For fertilized eggs to settle and reproduce on a reef, the surface must be clean and hard. The solution, tested as part of the initiative, is to fit small star-shaped structures made of steel bars onto the reef which allow fertilized eggs to settle and grow. The ‘stars’ are built by local indigenous people, thus creating local employment.

The Resilient Reefs Initiative continues until 2024, with a total of USD$ 10 million mobilized.

Reefs at the heart of the UN Ocean Decade 2021-2030

From this new plan to boost World Heritage-listed reef resilience, to using water quality monitoring to protect coral reefs in Tanzania, to deploying nanotechnology to make reefs more resilient in the Caribbean, reef conservation and recovery are among key actions endorsed by UNESCO as part of the UN Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development 2021-2030 (The “Ocean Decade”).

Launched in 2021 under UNESCO’s coordination, the United Nations Ocean Decade brings together scientists, ocean managers, indigenous and local communities, and public and private investment to co-design solutions for conserving and revitalizing reef ecosystems around the world.
The UNESCO Global Geopark label recognizes geological heritage of international significance. Member States unanimously ratified its creation in 2015. The sites of this network present an extraordinary geological diversity that underpins different regions’ biological and cultural diversity. The geoparks serve local communities by combining the conservation of their unique geological heritage with public outreach and sustainable development.

With these 8 new designations, the Network now covers a worldwide surface area of 370,662 km², comparable to the area of Japan.

Two of the newly designated UNESCO Global Geoparks are situated in Latin America and six in Europe. Owing to COVID-19 restrictions, no new applications from Asia, Africa or the Arab region could be evaluated this year but several projects for the creation of new geoparks on these parts of the world are under way.

The newly designated UNESCO Global Geoparks are:
Globally only 88 men are enrolled in tertiary education for every 100 women. In 73 countries, fewer boys than girls are enrolled in upper-secondary education, while the opposite is the case in 48 countries. These UNESCO data highlight a global phenomenon: child labour and poverty, among other factors, prevent boys from engaging fully with learning and contribute to repetition and dropout.

In all regions except sub-Saharan Africa, young men are underrepresented in higher education. This is particularly acute in North America, Western Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, where 81 young men for every 100 young women are enrolled at tertiary education. In East Asia and the Pacific, the equivalent is 87, while in the Arab States and Central and Eastern Europe region, it is 91.

Poverty and Child Labour: Barriers to Boys’ Education

Of the 160 million children engaged in labour activity in 2020, 97 million were boys. One of the main reasons is the lack of a protective legal framework. Of 146 countries with data, only 55 have a minimum age of employment aligned with the end of the countries’ stipulated years of compulsory education and above the age of 15, while 31 percent have a minimum age for employment below the age of 15 or do not clearly define a minimum age.
Kvedaravicius was known for his documentary work on Mariupol. His documentary, Mariupolis, was presented at the Berlin International Film Festival in 2016.

Last year, UNESCO published a policy brief on the safety of foreign correspondents to raise attention to the specific risks and threats they face.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contacts:
Villanueva frequently denounced corruption in local news reports on Noticias del Puerto, a website he owned, and Facebook. He had previously faced threats in connection with his journalism and his house is said to have been raided by police after he reported on police violence in 2021.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Maksim Levin, 41 years old, was a photographer and videographer who was working for a Ukrainian news website and was a long-time contributor to the news agency Reuters. The European Federation of Journalists (EFJ) had reported that Mr. Levin had been missing since 13 March.

In March, UNESCO announced new measures to protect journalists in Ukraine, including the provision of protective equipment and accelerated training, especially for those who do not have experience working in conflict zones.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contacts:
The MOOC will comprise a series of free online courses and is based on the UNESCO Training Manual on Freedom of Expression and Public Order . It is aimed at police, security forces and law enforcement agencies, including trainers of police officers, gendarmerie, emergency preparedness, security and police trainees, intelligence officers, riot police, spokespersons of police and investigators.

Both the MOOC and a global training of trainers will be designed and delivered by IBZ Castle Gimborn, the training and educational facility of the International Police Association, in North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.

UNESCO's long experience in the training of judicial actors

According to UNESCO data, almost nine-in-ten journalist killings worldwide in recent years remain unresolved. The UNESCO and IPA training initiative will also encourage police to pursue investigations to ensure that those responsible for these crimes are identified and prosecuted.

To implement this training, UNESCO will draw from its long experience of training judges, who also play a critical role in the protection of freedom of expression, freedom of press and access to information. Since 2013, the Organization and its partners have trained 23,000 judges, judicial actors and civil society representatives from around the world on international standards around these issues.

These activities are implemented within the framework of the UN Plan of Action on Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity and will be supported with funds from the Ministry of the Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, through the International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC).

Media contact: Clare O’Hagan
With the strong support of the Global Education Coalition – created by UNESCO in 2020 to facilitate distance learning solutions during the pandemic – UNESCO will provide with its partners computer hardware for teachers to support online teaching and learning. The Organization will coordinate the production of new digital learning contents, focusing on the early grades, psycho-social support and teacher training.

UNESCO will also support the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine through the creation of a reliable and secure system that will facilitate the provision of online exams for the admission of students to universities, vocational and training institutions.

Enabling refugee students to continue their studies

UNESCO welcomes the initiatives taken by some of its Member States to host and integrate Ukrainian student refugees and international students formerly studying in Ukraine.

The Organization is mapping these initiatives and features them through a dedicated webpage on the UNESCO website. This is a tool to share best practices and to inspire all countries that want to support learners and teachers fleeing the war.

For example, in Poland, authorities are planning to create new educational and childcare centres for incoming Ukrainian children. The country also plans to facilitate the employment of Ukrainian citizens as teacher assistants. In Romania, some schools offer instruction in Ukrainian. In Latvia, according to a new law, Ukrainians have a right to work as teachers to teach refugee students under the age of 18.

Education data in Ukraine

According to UNESCO’s Institute for Statistics data, Ukraine’s total school-age population from pre-primary to tertiary education is over 6.84 million. This represents 1.05 million in pre-primary, 1.72 million and 2.54 million respectively at primary and secondary levels, and 1.53 million in tertiary education.

The country counts 15,500 preschool institutions; 14,000 primary and basic secondary schools; 695 vocational education institutions; and 336 higher education institutions.

Ukraine is also a hub for students from abroad at tertiary level, with a five-fold increase between 2001 and 2020 to 61,000 foreign students. The top five countries sending students to Ukraine in 2020 was India, Morocco, Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan and Nigeria.

Media contact: Clare O’Hagan, +33 1 45 68 17 29
The twin explosions devastated swathes of the city on 4 August 2020, destroying or damaging 80% of Beirut’s city centre infrastructure, including 280 educational institutions. They keep at least 85,000 students out of school. Just after this tragedy, Audrey Azoulay, Director-General of UNESCO, went to Beirut to launch the ambitious international initiative Li Beirut (‘For Beirut’ in Arabic) to support the Lebanese population and the recovery of the city.

UNESCO and its partners immediately appealed to donors who have responded to this call, providing USD$35 million: the total cost of the needs. Thanks to these funds, rehabilitation works started quickly. And despite the pandemic, the work continued until it was fully completed today.
Oksana Baulina worked for the investigative website The Insider, reporting from Kyiv and Lviv. She is the fifth journalist to die in the conflict.

On 17 March, the Director-General announced new measures to protect journalists in Ukraine, including the provision of protective equipment and accelerated training, especially for those who do not have experience working in conflict zones.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contacts:
Huge social, economic and environmental benefits and opportunities

The quality of groundwater is generally good, which means it can be used safely and affordably, without requiring advanced levels of treatment. Groundwater is often the most cost-effectiveway of providing a secure supply of water to rural villages.

Certain regions, such as Saharan Africa and the Middle East for example, hold substantial quantities of non-renewable groundwater supplies that can be extracted in order to maintain water security. However, consideration for future generations and for the economic, financial and environmental aspects of storage depletion should not be overlooked.

In Sub-Saharan Africa, the opportunities offered by the vast aquifers remain largely underexploited. Only 3% of farmland is equipped for irrigation, and only 5% of that area uses groundwater, compared to 59% and 57% respectively in North America and South Asia.

As the report points out, this low use is not due to a lack of renewable groundwater (which is often abundant), but rather by a lack of investments in infrastructure, institutions, trained professionals and knowledge of the resource. The development of groundwater could act as a catalyst for economic growth by increasing the extent of irrigated areas and therefore improving agricultural yields and crop diversity.

In terms of climate change adaptation, the capacity of aquifer systems to store seasonal or episodic surface water surpluses can be exploited to improve year-round freshwater availability, as aquifers incur substantially lower evaporative losses than surface reservoirs. For example, including groundwater storage and abstraction as part of urban water supply planning would add security and flexibility in cases of seasonal variation.
Linares López, who is reported to have been shot 8 times in his house, was the Director of online news platform Monitor Michoacán. The murder occurred just a month and a half after the murder of Roberto Toledo, a colleague of Linares López at Monitor Michoacán. Mr. Linares López is the 7th journalist killed in Mexico in 2022.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contacts: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
From the first day of the war, UNESCO has consistently called for the respect of international law to protect journalists, technicians, fixers and other media professionals as civilians in a conflict zone, and to refrain from any attack on communication infrastructure. The Organization has also monitored attacks on journalists and damage to press infrastructure, as well as systematically condemning the killing of at least four journalists and the wounding of several others.

The UN agency is in constant contact with local journalists' associations, international NGOs and online platforms to identify needs, provide technical advice and work on urgent interventions. To respond to these needs, Audrey Azoulay announced Wednesday several additional emergency measures to be rolled out this week by UNESCO.
Zakrzewski was a veteran warzone photographer who had covered many conflicts including those in Iraq, Afghanistan and Syria. Kuvshynova was a 24-year old-local journalist. She had been working with Fox News for one month prior to her death.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

Last year, UNESCO published a policy brief on the safety of foreign correspondents to raise attention to the specific risks and threats they face.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contacts:
Walt Mzengi (Tanzania)

Walt Mzengi, is a filmmaker from Tanzania whose background in film started at AFDA, a film school in Cape Town, where he received a three-year scholarship to major in Directing and Screenwriting.

While in South Africa, he worked on several award-winning films (Mthunzi 2019, Heavens Reaches down to Earth 2020) and directed films that have been selected to screen at festivals around the world (Gulf 2019, Timêla 2020).

After he received his degree he returned to Tanzania with the goal of mentoring aspiring local filmmakers to collaborate and produce Tanzanian films. This extends to teaching film and deconstructing conventional film structures to encourage narratives that are contemporary and authentic to the filmmakers' identity.

Walt is a true believer in the responsibility and power of the visual media creative. He pursues the production of stories that hold the more delicate and often unspoken truths of humanity, and society. It is through his compassion and keen visual eye that Walt produces his work.
Juan Carlos worked for the news portal Testigo Minero, where he covered policing and organized crime, under the pseudonym “Rigoberto” or “TX”. He also reported for other media outlets in the city.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Some 41% of the global population is at risk from flooding caused by tropical cyclones. Thanks to new mathematical models and better algorithms, the path of a tropical cyclone can now be predicted up to a week in advance. In 2019, it could only be predicted five days in advance and, in the 1970s, just 36 hours ahead. Longer visibility gives municipal authorities precious additional time to plan the evacuation of populations in highly exposed areas.

This is just one of many case studies in Mathematics for Action, a new UNESCO publication released on 14 March to mark International Mathematics Day. “The study demonstrates why it makes sense for governments to include a mathematician on their team of scientific advisors”, says Christiane Rousseau of the Department of Mathematics and Statistics at the University of Montréal in Canada, who led the development of the toolkit.

Mathematical methods to design vaccines

“The COVID-19 pandemic has really brought mathematical modelling into the public eye”, she adds. “Two years ago, who would have thought that a term such as ‘flattening the curve’ would become part of the public lexicon?” Similarly, news stories referring to mathematical terms such as the basic reproduction number (R0) of the virus or ‘herd immunity’ through mass vaccination have become regular features. Mathematical methods themselves have been used to design vaccines more efficiently and to model vaccine hesitancy as a social phenomenon.

But the utility of mathematics does not stop there. For Norbert Hounkonnou, President of the Network of African Science Academies, “the Mathematics for Action toolkit is a revolutionary policy-oriented tool. It showcases the decisive role of mathematics in contributing to solving the world’s most pressing challenges and in achieving the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals”.

One of these goals is to end poverty. The toolkit describes, for example, how researchers were able to compile poverty maps of 552 villages and communities in Senegal and identify areas in need of greater public investment, despite missing census data. By applying mathematical tools like machine learning algorithms (artificial intelligence), the researchers were able to establish the extent of poverty in specific areas. .

Scenarios for the future

How are the many services nature provides, such as freshwater, medicinal plants or crops to be priced? Two research studies in Mathematics for Action do just that by quantifying the value of ecosystem services and biodiversity of large estuaries in North America and Asia.

The toolkit describes how mathematical models enable the exploration of multiple “what-if” scenarios to inform the decision-making process. Scientists use climate models in combination with storylines to produce plausible alternative scenarios for the future.

“The shortage of quality mathematics teachers around the world is a threat to training a sufficient number of mathematicians and scientists capable of meeting the challenges of the contemporary world”, warn Merrilyn Goos and Anjum Halai, the two Vice-Presidents of the International Commission on Mathematical Instruction, two authors of the toolkit.
Renaud had worked for a number of American outlets, including HBO, NBC and The New York Times, and had reported from multiple conflict zones. His reporting partner was also shot in the same incident but survived.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

Last year, UNESCO published a policy brief on the safety of foreign correspondents to raise attention to the specific risks and threats they face.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contacts:
The report finds that Google and Meta/Facebook now soak up approximately half of all global digital advertising spending, while global newspaper advertising revenue has fallen by half in the last five years.

COVID exacerbated the News Crisis

The pandemic intensified existing trends in declining advertising revenue, job losses, and newsroom closures. The UNESCO report cites data from the International Center for Journalists showing two-thirds of journalists feel less secure in their jobs as a result of the economic pressures of the pandemic.

In a pandemic, journalism, particularly investigative journalism, is a life-saving frontline service. As false content related to COVID-19 spread rapidly on social media, newsroom closures and job cuts created a significant vacuum in the information landscape, particularly in the global south. In September of 2020, over 1 million posts circulated on Twitter with inaccurate, unreliable, or misleading information related to the pandemic, according to the COVID19 Infodemics Observatory, an initiative of the Fondazione Bruno Kessler.

Journalists Under Attack from all Sides

This economic crisis also comes at a time of increasing threats to the safety of journalists not only from governments and criminal groups, but also from private lobbies and from some members of the public who feel increasingly emboldened to launch slurs and attacks online.

Impunity for killings : From 2016 to the end of 2021, UNESCO recorded the killings of 455 journalists, who either died for their work or while on the job. Almost nine out of ten killings remain unresolved. The global rate of impunity for killing journalists fuels a cycle of violence and has a chilling effect on all journalists.

: From 2016 to the end of 2021, UNESCO recorded the killings of 455 journalists, who either died for their work or while on the job. Almost nine out of ten killings remain unresolved. The global rate of impunity for killing journalists fuels a cycle of violence and has a chilling effect on all journalists. Massive online violence against journalists is another new and evolving trend, and one which disproportionately affects women journalists all around the world. A 2021 UNESCO paper found that more than seven out of ten of women journalists surveyed had experienced online violence. A fifth reported having experienced off-line violence in connection with online threats.

is another new and evolving trend, and one which disproportionately affects women journalists all around the world. A 2021 UNESCO paper found that more than seven out of ten of women journalists surveyed had experienced online violence. A fifth reported having experienced off-line violence in connection with online threats. Attacks against journalists covering protests, demonstrations and riots are also worryingly common: From January to August 2021, UNESCO registered such attacks in at least 60 countries in all world regions. Since 2015, at least 13 journalists have been killed while covering protests.

In many countries, the laws do not sufficiently protect journalists from these threats. And, in some cases, the legal framework actually increases the risk to them. Since 2016, 44 countries have adopted or amended new laws that contain vague language or threaten disproportionate punishments for actions like spreading 'fake news', 'rumours' or 'cyber-libel', leading to self-censorship.

In 160 countries defamation is still a criminal offence. When defamation law is criminal, rather than civil, it can be used as grounds for arrest or detention, effectively muzzling journalists. Data from the Committee to Protect Journalists shows 293 journalists were imprisoned in 2021, the highest yearly total in three decades.

UNESCO urges governments to take policy-action in three key areas to protect independent media and journalists’ safety:
The Organization is in contact with Ukrainian authorities to mark cultural sites and monuments with the distinctive “Blue Shield” emblem of the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict to avoid deliberate or accidental damages.

Properties inscribed on World Heritage list, such as the site of “Kyiv: Saint-Sophia Cathedral and Related Monastic Buildings, Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra”, are considered a priority. The marking process started this weekend at the site of “L'viv – the Ensemble of the Historic Centre”.

Satellite monitoring of the damage

UNESCO, with its partner UNITAR (United Nations Institute for Training and Research), also analyses satellite imagery for priority sites, which are endangered or already impacted, in order to assess damage.
Yevheniy Sakun, a cameraman for Kiev Live TV channel, was among the many people killed in the attack on the tower.

UNESCO issued statements on 24 February and 3 March expressing deep concern about developments in Ukraine, including the shelling of the Kyiv TV Tower, and recalling obligations under Resolution 2222 to avoid targeting media professionals, equipment and installations.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
The runner-up team come from the University of British Columbia Okanagan in Canada. Ammar Zavahir, Patrick Jilek-Rodriguez and Wilson Holland developed a mobile rainwater harvesting system for indigenous communities in Canada.

Organized by the World Federation of Engineering Organizations with UNESCO support, the hackathon showcases the inventiveness of young engineers when it comes to solving real-life problems. Some 125 teams from 23 countries around the world competed in the hackathon, with nine teams from six countries making it through to the finals. These countries are Australia, Canada, China, India, Kenya and the Philippines. Some 92% of participants were engineering students.

During the first round of the hackathon, the teams were given 13 days to come up with a sustainable engineering solution to one of three challenges. These solutions demonstrate the resourcefulness of future engineers. Here is how some of the other finalists tackled these three challenges:
Consistent with its mandate, UNESCO demands the immediate cessation of attacks on civilian facilities, such as schools, universities, memorial sites, cultural and communication infrastructures, and deplores civilian casualties, including students, teachers, artists, scientists and journalists. These include women and children, girls especially, disproportionately impacted by the conflict and displacement.

In the field of education, Resolution 2601 adopted in 2021 by the UN Security Council states that UN Member States are to “prevent attacks and threats of attacks against schools and ensure the protection of schools and civilians connected with schools, including children and teachers during armed conflict as well as in post-conflict phases”. The General Assembly Resolution of 2 March expresses grave concern at reports of attacks on civilian facilities including schools. In this regard, UNESCO strongly condemns attacks against education facilities, with the damaging of at least seven institutions in the past week, including the attack on 2 March on Karazin Kharkiv National University.

The nationwide closure of schools and education facilities has affected the entire school-aged population -- 6 million students between 3 and 17 years old, and more than 1.5 million enrolled in higher education institutions. The escalation of violence hampers the protective role of education, and the impact may be far-reaching including in neighbouring countries.

In the field of culture, UNESCO underlines the obligations of international humanitarian law, notably the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and its two (1954 and 1999) Protocols, to refrain from inflicting damage to cultural property, and condemns all attacks and damage to cultural heritage in all its forms in Ukraine. UNESCO calls also for the full implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 2347.

In this respect, UNESCO is gravely concerned with the damages incurred by the city of Kharkiv, UNESCO Creative City for Music, and the historic centre of Chernihiv, on Ukraine’s World Heritage Tentative List. UNESCO deeply regrets reports of damage to the works of the celebrated Ukrainian artist, Maria Primachenko, with whose anniversary UNESCO was associated in 2009.

UNESCO condemns also the attack that affected the Babyn Yar Holocaust memorial, the site of one of the largest mass shootings of Jews during World War II, and calls for the respect of historic sites, whose value for education and remembrance is irreplaceable.

In order to prevent attacks, UNESCO, in close coordination with the Ukrainian authorities, is working to mark as quickly as possible key historic monuments and sites across Ukraine with the distinctive emblem of the 1954 Hague Convention, an internationally recognised signal for the protection of cultural heritage in the event of armed conflict. In addition, UNESCO has approached the Ukrainian authorities with a view to organising a meeting with museum directors across the country to help them respond to urgent needs for safeguarding museum collections and cultural property. In cooperation with UNITAR/UNOSAT, UNESCO will be monitoring the damages incurred by cultural sites through satellite imagery analysis.

In the field of access to information and freedom of expression, UNESCO recalls its previous statement underlining obligations under UN Security Council Resolution 2222 to protect media professionals and associated personnel. It further notes, as in the same resolution, “media equipment and installations constitute civilian objects, and in this respect shall not be the object of attack or of reprisals, unless they are military objectives”.

In this respect, UNESCO is deeply concerned about reports of the targeting of media infrastructure, including the shelling of Kyiv’s main television tower on 1 March 2022, with multiple reported fatalities, including at least one media worker, as well as cases of violence against journalists and attempts to restrict access to the Internet.

In a conflict situation, free and independent media are critical for ensuring civilians have access to potentially life-saving information and debunking disinformation and rumours.

At the request of a group of Member States, the UNESCO Executive Board will hold a Special Session on 15 March “to examine the impact and consequences of the current situation in Ukraine in all aspects of UNESCO’s mandate”.
Baktash Abtin died from COVID-19 related complications while serving a six-year prison sentence. Reports suggest his treatment was delayed and that this may have been a factor in his death.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Maxilien, who worked for online media group Roi des Infos was shot while covering a workers’ demonstration for higher pay and died in hospital hours later. Two other journalists were wounded.

UNESCO’s downloadable brief on the Safety of Journalists Covering Protests includes best practices that contribute to the safety of media workers in times of turmoil for the attention of both media and authorities.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
UNESCO calls for respect for international humanitarian law, notably the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and its two (1954 and 1999) Protocols, to ensure the prevention of damage to cultural heritage in all its forms.

This also includes the obligations under the United Nations Security Council Resolution 2222 (2015) on the protection of journalists, media professionals and associated personnel in situations of conflict, to promote free, independent and impartial media as one of the essential foundations of a democratic society, and which can contribute to the protection of civilians.

UNESCO also calls for restraint from attacks on, or harm to, children, teachers, education personnel or schools, and for the right to education to be upheld.

Press contact: Thomas Mallard, +33 1 45 68 22 93
Marwan Yousef, a journalist and photographer, was killed while covering clashes between government forces and Houthis.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Güngör Arslan, publisher and editor of local news site Ses Kocaeli, died in hospital shortly after he was shot outside his office. He had received repeated threats in connection with his reporting on corruption, bribery, and clientelism and in April 2020 armed assailants opened fire on the offices of his website.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Evariste Djaï-Loramadji was shot dead while reporting for a community radio, Radio Lotiko, on an attack by local herders on the farmers of his village. At least ten other people are reported to have been killed in the raid.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Working for Odia-language newspaper Dharitri, Rohit Kumar Biswal died instantly in the detonation of an explosive device while he was taking pictures for a report on local elections.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Givanildo Oliveira, also known as ‘Gigi’, was one of the founders of the local news site, PriambuNews. The journalist who had received threats for his reports on local crime was shot dead near his home in the Pirambu neighbourhood of Fortaleza.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
López Vásquez, who covered crime and police for the RCP Noticias news website, was shot dead in his office. He is the fifth journalist murdered in Mexico this year.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Against the background of the ongoing pandemic, which disproportionally impacted the livelihoods of artists and cultural professionals globally, the Fifteenth Session of the UNESCO Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions held this week approved over US$730,000 in funding for cultural projects.

The funding, from the International Fund for Cultural Diversity (IFCD) will benefit 9 projects from Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Guinea, Indonesia, Nigeria, Palestine, Seychelles and Timor-Leste, from a total of 615 project proposals submitted. This brings total support from the IFCD to more than US$ 9.4 million, resulting in funding for 129 projects in 65 Member States since 2010.

The Committee’s decision is in line with UNESCO’s policy to support the creative and cultural sector, which has suffered from the pandemic, as shown in the recent report, Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity.
Knowing the depth and relief of the seabed is essential to understanding the location of ocean faults, the workings of ocean currents and tides, and the transport of sediments. Such data help protect populations as they allow us to anticipate seismic and tsunami risks, identify natural sites that need to be safeguarded and fisheries resources for sustainable exploitation. They are needed to plan the construction of offshore infrastructure and to respond effectively to disasters such as oil spills, air crashes and shipwrecks. They also have a major role to play in assessing the future effects of climate change, whether it be temperature increases or sea level rise.

Considerable progress since 2017

In 2017, UNESCO and the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) joined forces with the Nippon Foundation, Japan’s largest private foundation, to launch the Seabed 2030 programme under the General Bathymetric Chart of the Ocean (GEBCO). Since then, Seabed 2030 has been coordinating the deployment of sonars and collecting the data they provide. The programme has convinced many States to share their data concerning the seabed near their coasts. The first results of this programme are tangible: when Seabed 2030 was launched five years ago, only 6% of the seabed was mapped to modern standards, today the figure stands at 20%.

The potential to accelerate seabed mapping is further enhanced by recent technological innovations. While sonar technology has been used since the 1960s to scan the seabed, sonars now have multiple beams enabling them to measure water height at several points and in several directions at once, which represents a considerable time saving. Moreover, whereas sonars were previously attached to manned seafaring vessels, scientists are now able to pilot them remotely on autonomous vessels, operating on the same principle as aerial drones. This solution opens up the possibility of mapping the seabed well beyond navigation routes. It also has the advantage of being more affordable.

A goal with an action plan

On the occasion of the One Ocean Summit, Ms Azoulay called for efforts to be stepped up by mobilizing the 150 Member States of UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) and the private sector. IOC experts have already assessed the resources needed to achieve the target of mapping at least 80% of the seabed by 2030. They consist of three axes:

The mobilization of a fleet of 50 vessels specially dedicated to seabed mapping.

Intensifying the use of sonar on autonomous vessels.

The transmission by governments and corporations of cartographic data they have already archived.

According to IOC experts, the total funding requirement for the project stands at $5 billion, i.e., an average of $625 million per year by 2030.
Amman, 11 February 2022 - For the seventh time, the International Day of Women and Girls in Science is celebrated on February 11 to promote full and equal access to and participation in science for women and girls. Women and girls play a critical role in the science and technology communities as agents of change. Gender equality is a global priority for UNESCO, and the support of young girls, their education and their full ability to make their ideas and voices heard are levers for development and peace.

Globally, although more girls are in schools than ever before, women represent only 30 per cent of all students enrolled in STEM-related fields (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) in higher education. The situation in Jordan presents in this respect a more encouraging picture; available data suggests that more than 60% of students in the natural sciences, medicine, dentistry and pharmacy are female; the figure for engineering lies around 28 per cent and that for computer science around 45 per cent.

In 2020, 76.5% of female students who took the Tawjihi science stream examination passed, compared to 65.3% of male students, and yet the number of male PhD holding academic staff and lecturers at Jordanian universities are more than twice that of their female counterparts. Moreover, Jordan has one of the highest numbers of female university graduates in the region, while at the same time it has one of the lowest number of women in the workforce. The figures suggest that Jordan does well in encouraging girls and young women to take up science related subjects at school and University level, however, there is room for improvement in their transition to the job market.

Globally, UNESCO is advocating for new policies, initiatives and mechanisms to support women and girls in science. To do that, it is necessary to understand the factors that deter women from pursuing careers in STEM. Among these factors are very often gender biases and social norms that influence the subjects girls and young women study. This gender disparity is a serious problem, particularly as STEM careers are very much seen as the “jobs of the future,” driving social well-being, innovation and inclusive growth. Scientists will play a key role in addressing the challenges of food security, climate change, clean energy, health, water and sanitation.

The world needs science and science needs women, not least in view of accelerating progress towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and it is therefore imperative that girls and women are encouraged to enter STEM education and careers, and continue in the field.
Valuing good practices

The new educational tools provided by UNESCO, with the support of AXA XL and numerous other partners and experts, reflect the conviction that we need to change the way society interacts with the ocean to achieve a more sustainable model.

In its reference tool, UNESCO highlights the good practices of Member States already working on ocean education, such as Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Kenya, Portugal and Sweden. In the form of case studies, the Organization presents the main results achieved by these countries, as well as the opportunities and challenges met when seeking to include ocean knowledge in a structured way in the curriculum.

Including traditional knowledge

For UNESCO, ocean education should not only involve the transmission of scientific knowledge and awareness of contemporary issues; it should also promote traditional skills and knowledge, such as those protected by the 2003 Convention on Intangible Cultural Heritage, which promotes ancestral fishing techniques, for example. UNESCO’s new toolkit leaves it to Member States and regions to adapt the “theory of change” to their specific practices, situations and needs.

UNESCO will monitor the implementation of this objective by its 193 Member States. A first progress report is planned for COP27, which will be held in November 2022 in Egypt.

UNESCO and the ocean

The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is the UN agency in charge of the ocean. UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), founded in 1960 and joined by 150 countries, coordinates global programmes such as ocean mapping, ocean health monitoring and tsunami risk prevention, as well as numerous scientific research projects. The agency is also the custodian of unique ocean places, through 232 marine biosphere reserves and 50 marine World Heritage sites of outstanding universal value.

UNESCO is leading the United Nations Decade of Ocean Sciences for Sustainable Development (2021 to 2030), which this year will see the organization of several major international summits that will help to amplify mobilization in this field.
Toledo, whose reporting for local news website Monitor Michoacán focused on cases of corruption, was killed in a car park by three gunmen. He was the fourth media worker to be murdered in Mexico this year.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
UNESCO Director General will also inaugurate in March dozens of historic houses, the reconstruction of which is almost complete.

An ambitious work started in Autumn 2018

In coordination with the Government of Iraq, local partners and international experts, the rehabilitation of these iconic monuments started in Autumn 2018 by the preparation phase of reconstruction.

Following the demining operation of the four sites that were extensively damaged due to booby-traps, hazardous materials and unexploded ordinance, started the clearing process: this was more than just the removal of old stones. In fact, amidst the rubble were valuable pieces that could be reused during reconstruction phase.

The selection of the valuable building fragments which had to be separated from the rubble had been done under the guidance of international experts and archeology students from the University of Mosul. These structural elements were stored in a safe warehouse and restored by trained students of the departments of archaeology, architecture and engineering of the University of Mosul.

Structural investigations and documentations have also been conducted by experts on site to plan the reconstruction and restoration of the four monuments. In parallel the four sites have all been secured and stabilized and ready for the construction site. As for Al Nouri Mosque, UNESCO launched, in November 2020, an International Design Competition for the selection of the design of Al Nouri Mosque. The winners, an Egyptian team, are currently finalizing the detailed design expected to be completed by April this year.

Beyond the rehabilitation of architectural landmarks, the initiative includes on-the-job training for young professionals, strengthening the capacities of craftspeople, job-creation opportunities, and technical and vocational education which will be implemented in partnership with the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property (ICCROM).

An exceptional archaeological discovery

The Assistant Director-General for Culture of UNESCO also visited the archaeological excavations conducted by the Ministry of Culture of Iraq and its State Board of Antiquities and heritage under Al Nouri Prayer Hall and made possible by the preparation phase of reconstruction of UNESCO.

The discovery incudes four rooms, dating back to the Atabeg period, probably used for ablution. This assumption is based on the uncovering of a series of water basins and drainage channels abutting the lateral walls of the rooms. The dating of the rooms was possible due to the discovery of coins dating back to this era. Other artefacts from different ages such as jars, fragments of pottery and carved stone pieces were also found.
The pandemic has proven the intrinsic value of the cultural and creative sector at generating social cohesion, educational resource or personal well-being in times of crisis. It has also undermined the sector’s potential to generate economic growth, something which is too often underestimated.

However, this global crisis has also demonstrated the significant challenges which need to be met to ensure that a diversity of cultural expressions around the world is preserved, in line with UNESCO's 2005 Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions.

Ensuring the diversity of cultural expressions

A new UNESCO report, entitled, Re|Shaping Policies for Creativity, shows that development assistance devoted to culture and recreation is on the decline and although the flow of cultural goods and services globally continues to rise, there has been very little progress in addressing the vast disparity between developed and developing countries. Very strong inequalities also persist in the cultural and creative sectors, like those faced by many women.

This greatly restricts people’s exposure to the diversity of cultural expressions from around the world, at a time when there is a compelling case that diversity is a structuring element for social cohesion and peace between peoples. In turn, it limits the ability of the cultural sector – which accounts for 3.1% of global GDP and 6.2% of all employment - to drive sustainable economic growth in developing countries.

Unprecedented collapse in income and employment in the sector

UNESCO estimates that 10 million jobs were lost in the creative industries in 2020 alone because of the pandemic. It has also calculated that the global Gross Value Added in the cultural and creative industries contracted by US$750bn in 2020. In countries for which data is available, the revenue of the cultural and creative industries decreased by between 20% and 40%.

Public expenditure worldwide in the creative industries declined in the years preceding the COVID-19 pandemic which in turn led to an unprecedented collapse in income and employment in the sector, magnifying the already precarious working conditions of many artists and cultural professionals around the globe.

The social security net for artists in many countries was already inadequate, however the pandemic has exposed just how vulnerable workers in the cultural and creative sectors are.
H.E. Mr Lee Jae-Wan, Ambassador of the Republic of Korea to Jordan, and Ms. Min Jeong Kim UNESCO Representative to Jordan hand over laptops to Syrian and Jordanian TVET students at Luminous Technical College University

Amman, 2 February,2022

As the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to wreak havoc on the education sector, many children and youth from less advantaged backgrounds are struggling to continue learning as lessons go online. In order to minimize learning disruption and to ensure equitable continuity of learning, 166 Syrian refugees and vulnerable Jordanian youths enrolled in Technical Vocational Education and Training (TVET) training courses, within the framework of UNESCO’s ongoing project funded by the Government of the Republic of Korea, received laptops and internet subscriptions.

The project ‘Provision of TVET, On-the-Job Training and Entrepreneurship Education to Youth Affected by the Syria Crisis in Jordan’, implemented in partnership with Luminus Technical University College (LTUC), is enabling 92 Jordanians and 74 Syrians, including 92 female students, to study in three disciplines: Business, Creative Media Production, and Information Technology.

The internationally accredited TVET programmes, which combine practical learning with subject and theory content, allow students to complete an eight-month course in their respective fields of study, followed by a one-month on-the-job training to reinforce the knowledge and skills they acquired.

While visiting the students at LTUC Amman campus, UNESCO Representative to Jordan, Ms. Min Jeong Kim, stressed the importance of this donation to ensure the continuity of learning through blended approaches, combining face-to-face and e-learning. She stated that the remote learning approach also contributes to enhancing students’ digital skills, which are critical for the labour market. Ms. Kim also highlighted the importance of the partnership with the Government of Korea in contributing to improve the employability prospects of young men and women affected by the Syria crisis in Jordan.

Ambassador Lee Jae-wan emphasized that the Korean government is keen on helping the continuity of education of Syrian refugees and vulnerable Jordanian students amid the prolonged COVID19 pandemic through supporting TVET training courses. He hoped that the laptops and Internet access will help in their effective learning to graduate with enhanced skills and abilities.

Students who benefited from the donation expressed their thanks and gratitude to UNESCO and the Government of Korea. They explained that the laptops did not just facilitate their current studies and enhanced their digital and research skills, but that they will also be crucial after they complete their courses and graduate, since they will use them to work as freelancers or on their own business projects.

Ibrahim Janseez, Syrian student enrolled in the Business course, shared that receiving the laptop has helped him to study and solve assignments, and gives him the opportunity to be more creative in his efforts to start a new business after the training programme is over, which will support his family income, and contribute to the community as a whole.

Hayat Al-Dos, Jordanian student in Information Technology, shared that “after receiving the laptop, I started to study for longer hours to get higher grades and search for job opportunities to support myself financially”.

Phase IV of the UNESCO training programme supports the ongoing efforts of the Government of Jordan to integrate e-learning into education system and is fully aligned with national policies and strategies such as the National Youth Strategy (2019-2025), Jordan Vision 2025, Jordan Response Plan for the Syria Crisis (JRP) (2020-2022), and Jordan Human Resource Development Strategy (HRDS) (2016-2025). A total of 761 students (440 Syrians, 321 Jordanians) have benefitted from the project since its inception in 2016, with the majority finding employment opportunities.
Netflix and UNESCO are excited to announce the 20 shortlisted candidates who will go forward in the exciting short film competition ‘African Folktales, Reimagined’. What’s more - the quality of submissions received resulted in one extra candidate being added to the list, making it 21 filmmakers on the shortlist. The candidates were selected following a rigorous evaluation process by a wide-range of industry professionals from across the continent who assessed over 2080 applications from across the continent in multiple languages. The shortlist contains a dynamic group of African creatives from across 13 countries in the region.

The shortlisted filmmakers include (in no particular order): Nosa Igbinedion (Nigeria); Ebot Tanyi (Cameroon); Loukman Ali (Uganda); Tongryang Pantu (Nigeria); Walt Mzengi (Tanzania); Venance Soro (Côte d'Ivoire); Noni Ireri (Kenya); Volana Razafimanantsoa (Madagascar); Mohamed Echkouna (Mauritania); Nader Fakhry (Côte d'Ivoire); Anne Catherine Tchokonté (Cameroon); Mphonyana Mokokwe (Botswana); Anita Abada (Nigeria); Samuel Kanyama (Zambia); Machérie Ekwa-Bahango (Democratic Republic of Congo); Oprah Oyugi (Kenya); Ndiyathemba Modibedi (South Africa); Gcobisa Yako (South Africa); Akorede Azeez (Nigeria); Katya Aragão (São Tomé and Príncipe) and Voline Ogutu (Kenya).

The 21 emerging filmmakers will go on to the next phase of the competition where they will be required to pitch their stories to a judging panel comprising of the mentors; Nigeria’s Femi Odugbemi, South Africa’s Bongiwe Selane, Leila Afua Djansi from Ghana, David Tosh Gitonga from Kenya, and Jean Luc Herbulot from the Republic of Congo as well as representatives from Netflix and UNESCO who will act as guides in the process. The panel will select the final six filmmakers who will receive a production grant of US$75,000 (through a local production company) to develop, shoot and post-produce their films under the guidance of Netflix and industry mentors to ensure everyone involved in the production is fairly compensated. Each of the 6 winners will also receive $25,000.
Havana, 27 January 2022. The Transcultura Programme: Integrating Cuba, the Caribbean and the European Union through Culture and Creativity, implemented by UNESCO and funded by the European Union, is receiving scholarship applications for the online courses on cultural entrepreneurship at the Open Campus of the University of the West Indies (UWIOC).

This call covers free access to 10 management courses for 300 young people from the Caribbean with expertise in the cultural and creative industries, to allow them to develop their skills and business projects.

These workshops will last 6 weeks and use a b-learning methodology, that combines traditional teaching with online tools. The offer includes: Small Business Management, Effective Management and Leadership, Effective Business Communication, Project Management, Finance for Non-Financial Managers, Entrepreneurship and New Venture Creation, Financial Monitoring and Evaluation, Sales and Marketing Management, Brand Management and Grant Proposals Writing. Courses will be taught in English by UWIOC professors with interpretation into Spanish and French. Teaching materials will be available in the three languages.
Pu Tuidim, founder and editor of the local Khonumthung Media Group, is reported to have been abducted with at least nine other civilians by members of the armed forces two days before their killing. He was covering violent clashes in the area, and had recently published allegations of abuses carried out by the armed forces.

Pu Tuidim is the third journalist to be killed in Myanmar in just over three weeks.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi
Regional Consultation on Cultural Policies: Culture as an engine for sustainable development and resilience in Africa

The Regional Consultation on Cultural Policies for the African region will be held on January 31 and February 1, 2022. For two days, 47 Ministers of Culture are invited to meet online, with international and non-governmental organizations, with all the key actors of the Arts and Culture sector to discuss and present the voice of the continent on the issues of culture and development.

Organized by UNESCO and under the presidency of Senegal, the regional consultation for Africa is part of a series of consultations being held in different regions of the world as a prelude to the MONDIACULT 2022 world conference that will take place from 28 to 30 September 2022 in Mexico. This important African meeting is also part of the celebration of the achievements of the 2021 Year of the African Union on "Arts, Culture and Heritage: Levers for Building the Africa We Want" as well as the entry into force of the Charter for the Cultural Renaissance of Africa, which establishes culture as a driving force and vector for sustainable development on the continent.

This high-level meeting aims, through an inclusive and participatory process, to identify in a consensual manner the immediate and future priorities to support the cultural sector and the creative industries at the continental level. The observations that will emerge from the discussions will ultimately serve to make specific recommendations on cultural policies for the countries of the region. Promising both the quality of the debates and the richness of the reflections, this exchange platform marks a high point in the dialogue on the contribution of culture to the achievement of the sustainable development goals and represents a unique opportunity for all stakeholders concerned to express themselves on the current challenges and opportunities of the sector.

The meeting will be hosted on the innovative online platform of the Ecole du Patrimoine Africain (EPA), and will also be accessible online to the general public via Youtube, where the exchanges will be broadcast live with interpretation available in French and English. Finally, the results of the two days of consultation will be reflected in a report synthesizing all the regional consultations that will be discussed by UNESCO Member States at the 214th session of the Executive Board in April 2022.
January 24 is International Day of Education (IDE). It was proclaimed four years ago by the United Nations General Assembly, inviting Member States, international and regional organizations and civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders “to continue to give consideration to enhancing international cooperation in support of the efforts of all Member States towards the realization of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 4”.

The proclamation of IDE stems from the UN’s recognition of the central role of education in building sustainable, resilient societies and in the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). As it was detailed in UNESCO’s global Futures of Education report, (to which Patrick Awuah, Founder and President, Ashesi University, Ghana contributed) transforming the future requires an urgent rebalancing of our relationships with each other, with nature as well as with technology that permeates our lives, bearing breakthrough opportunities while raising serious concerns for equity, inclusion and democratic participation.

The theme for this year’s International Day of Education is “Changing Course, Transforming Education”. This is to facilitate and celebrate initiatives being led by governments, educators, organizations—from global to grassroots efforts—as well as partnerships demonstrating the potential to recommit education to the principles of equity and relevance; and we highlight commitments and follow-up actions taken to protect education.

The Government of Ghana has so far demonstrated a strong determination to ensure that learners (particularly girls and learners with special educational needs) continue to learn in a safe environment. In order to ensure continuity of learning, the Government with the support of UN System (through UNICEF, UNESCO, UNHCR and ILO) and other development partners contributed to providey solutions at all levels of the education system. Specifically, public universities and Colleges of Education established Learning Management Systems (LMS), Senior High Schools (SHS) students have been given access to the ICAMPUSGH online platform and the IBOX offline learning platform and Ghana Learning TV and Radio programmes produced for basic school children. Further, learners at the basic level have also benefitted from national distance learning programmes via radio, which continues to help bridge the equity gaps. Through the Global Education Coalition, several partners contributed also to support government effort (Equipment, Expertise, contents, open ressourecs..). Despite some challenges that have been encountered by students’ in accessing and using some of these learning systems, it is obvious that Ghana is striving to change course to transform education, and the United Nations in Ghana is delighted to partner with the government in its mission.

Other notable initiatives that the UN is supporting the Government to implement to make the education resilient include a Rapid Risk Assessment of the impact of COVID-19 on the education sector and supporting in the design/implementation of interventions to mitigate the negative effects, ongoing capacity building for basic school teachers in Emergency Remote Teaching and ICT Essential skills, development of the Ghana Open Educational Resource Repository (OER), which will eventually host over 3,000 open-source Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) materials from the Commonwealth of Learning (COL). Similarly, the over 15,000 PDF, interactive videos, virtual laboratories, and other educational content currently hosted on the ICampus/IBox platform would be released as OER for use by learners and educators. The policy environment is also being strengthened by the ongoing review of Ghana’s ICT in Education Policy while the institutional capacity of the Centre for National Distance Learning and Open Schooling (CENDLOS) is being strengthened with drafting of the CENDLOS Bill and capacity building for the CENDLOS staff to enable the institution to play its role effectively as the national entity responsible for integration of ICT into the education system. Additionally, to ensure the safe return of children to school, the Ministry of Education and Ghana Education service has been supported to implement the back-to-school campaigns targeting vulnerable learners including pregnant girls, young mothers, children with disability, among others, using the ‘Guidelines on Prevention of Pregnancy Among School Girls and Re-Entry for Young Mothers After Childbirth’ and the ‘Safe Schools Resource Pack’. Further, the UN in Ghana has supported annual health and disability screening for early grade learners; implementation of Digital Literacy programmes and other initiatives including the Learning Passport, Differentiated Learning and Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principles so as to bridge the equity gap and to promote continuous learning within a safe environment for all.

All these efforts have strengthened the education system with new approaches in transforming education in Ghana in the midst of the COVID 19 pandemic and as well as any future crisis that may occur. This progress by Ghana which is worth commending need to be supported on a coherent and coordinated manner by partners.

As we work together towards the realization of Sustainable Development Goal #4, the UN in Ghana remains committed to supporting the government in changing the course through innovation approaches of transforming education to benefit all children.
On the occasion of Holocaust Remembrance Day, UNESCO and the World Jewish Congress (WJC) launched a new partnership with the online platform TikTok to tackle Holocaust distortion and denial. Users searching for terms relating to the Holocaust will be redirected to verified information.

The circulation of false information about the Holocaust is a growing problem online, and not all platforms are taking effective action to curb this harmful trend. The Centre for Countering Digital Hate said in August last year, 84% of antisemitic content reported to social media companies was allowed to remain on their platforms.

According to UN and UNESCO data, 17% of content related to the Holocaust on TikTok either denied or distorted the Holocaust. Faced with this problem, the platform has decided to act, by drawing on the expertise of UNESCO and the WJC.
Hernández Rivera, who was shot dead while walking to church was the director of community Radio Tenan, which regularly reported on corruption at the local level. He was also a leader of the Lenca indigenous community and a member of a network of human rights defenders.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi, g.godoi@unesco.org
Unidentified gunmen shot Angeles, a broadcaster on local Radyo ni Juan Tacurong, in a car wash facility. He had stepped down from his former position as the radio’s manager to take part in the race to be elected as councilor in the town of Lambayong in the same province.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi, g.godoi@unesco.org
Gamboa Arenas, Director of news website Inforegio and who reported on organized crime and corruption, died from knife injuries sustained on 10 January.

Photojournalist Martinez Esquivel, who also covered crime and corruption, was shot dead. He had recently been included in a government programme to protect journalists following threats to his life.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi, g.godoi@unesco.org
Based on lessons from the past two years, the majority of countries affected by the highly contagious variant of Omicron are succeeding in keeping schools open with reinforced health and safety protocols. But the continued disruption to education requires bolder measures to recover learning losses.

According to new data released by UNESCO on International Day of Education, schools are currently open in most countries of the world (135). In a small number of countries (25), schooling has been temporarily suspended by extending the end-of-year break.

Only a dozen countries have opted to close schools and pivot to fully remote rather than in-person learning since the outbreak of the Omicron variant. This is in stark contrast with the same period last year when schools were closed, and learning was fully remote in 40 countries.
Nairobi, Monday 24 January 2022 – “Today we are appealing to the key actors responsible for the learning and futures of children living across the Eastern and Southern Africa region. Even during the pre-pandemic period, a vast majority of African children were experiencing a widespread learning crisis, with COVID-19 only serving to exacerbate the situation. With concerted vaccination and treatment efforts, we will defeat this pandemic. But the learning loss it has caused will certainly stay with us for much longer.

“To Governments, school gates must always be the last to close, and first to open. By now evidence in all our countries has shown that when schools close, children not only lose out on their learning progress, but also the safety of the school ground, interactions with friends, a route to healthcare, and, too often, their only nutritious meal of the day. Many governments across the region have made admirable efforts to keep schools safely open via strong Ministry of Health and Education collaboration and community partnerships.

“We equally urge governments to honour their commitments to the Paris Declaration to devote at least 4 per cent of GDP, or 15 per cent of public spending, to education. Furthermore, we ask you to increase social protection for the most vulnerable families as we know that when they are adequately supported, their children are more likely to return to school.

“To teachers, we commend you, as some of the most vital frontline workers in the COVID era. We call on your employers to allocate additional resources to cater for your learners, particularly the most vulnerable, and urge you to adjust your teaching methods to the new context. We also strongly encourage you to be vaccinated against COVID-19 when available.

“To parents, we underscore that it is in the best interests of your children to be in school as safety measures are in place to protect them through frequent handwashing, mask wearing, adequate ventilation and social distancing.

“To the children, we urge you to take these precautions at all times with an understanding that they serve to protect you and the people you care about.

“To our private sector and development partners, we appeal to you to work with us to help overcome this crisis and to ensure that 2022 is the year children are supported to catch up on the learning loss they have suffered. We urge you to substantially increase funding for distance learning modalities, including digital technology and innovation, to protect against learning gaps and prepare students for future jobs in an increasingly digital world.

“We each must step up action urgently to play our part if we are to overcome this potential catastrophe for children and their education; the future of the continent depends on our joint ability to do so.”
In supporting the CTU in the event, ITU Area Office in Bridgetown stated “The COVID-19 pandemic has brought the digital divide and the issue of connectivity into stark focus – in particular in the education sector. As communities with good connectivity are able to continue to work and learn, those communities with minimal connectivity or without, or who depend fully on the analogue world, are left out. ITU is leveraging its strategic partnership with UNICEF, Government and the Private Sector in the OECS through its GIGA Initiative to map every school's connectivity, finance connectivity, connect every school, and empower young people.”

“Through the GIGA Initiative, the ITU supports COVID-19 responses in the region with connectivity and remote learning solutions in order to connect every school to the internet, and every young person to information, opportunity and choice. The ITU is pleased to partner with the CTU as indeed, this important ICT in Education Forum will certainly help to address the social and moral imperative of connectivity and ICT in the education sector,” added the ITU Area Office in Bridgetown .

Registration is open to representatives of the major stakeholders in the fields of education and technology in the Caribbean. This includes policy makers, regulators, operators, academia and other users.

For more information and registration, please visit:

https://ctu.int/event/ict-in-education-a-caribbean-forum/

For further information, please contact:

Catherina Schӧnhammer, Email: c.schonhammer@unesco.org

Michelle Garcia, E-mail: michelle.garcia@ctu.int
“BeMA is very happy with its first association with UNESCO through the Li Beirut initiative and we thank the republic of Iceland for their generous support”, said from her side Michele Haddad, Director of BeMA. “It is a real joy to see the restored artworks and have them returned, in the next few days, to their original locations. BeMA’s restoration team continues its meticulous important work restoring and conserving pieces of the BeMA - Ministry of Culture Collection, a stunning collection that is a visual history of modern Lebanon”, she added.

The treatment of the artworks followed a series of steps, such as the cleaning of the paintings’ surface and reverse, the mending of the tears using microscopes and special light, and the retouching of the scratches. 7 restorers worked on the restoration project: 4 from the BeMA team and 3 Graduate students of the Conservation Institute of the Cologne University of Applied Sciences, specialized in tear mending canvas restoration. BeMA also extended an internship program to the graduate students for 6 weeks in October and November 2021 in order to support the restoration project.

The exhibition will be on view until 22 January 2022, at the Crypt of the Saint-Joseph University campus in Huvelin, after which the artworks will return to their original locations, 16 months after the blasts.

About Li Beirut

Li Beirut is an international flagship initiative launched from Beirut by the Director-General of UNESCO, Audrey Azoulay, on August 27, 2020, in the aftermath of the port explosions, to support the rehabilitation of schools and educational institutions, historic heritage buildings, museums, galleries, and the creative industry, all of which suffered significant damage in the deadly explosions.

About BeMA

BeMA is a new museum scheduled to open in 2026 on a site owned by the Université Saint Joseph (USJ). Situated in an area that once represented the city’s dividing line, BeMA symbolizes reconciliation and unification through art and culture. This new cultural platform for modern and contemporary art from Lebanon and the region will primarily showcase the work of local artists and the Lebanese diaspora, while also introducing regional and international artistic traditions and production.
Multilateral agencies in Jordan call for continued prioritization of education during COVID-19

AMMAN, 19 January 2022 — Schools should be the last sector to close and the first to open to prevent a loss of learning that could impact children for years to come, called the heads of UN agencies and the World Bank in Jordan today.

All agencies and the World Bank recognized the efforts made to date by the Government of Jordan to prioritize school opening, with significant investments made to date to ensure that the necessary measures are in place for safe learning and that both children and teachers have the skills and tools they need to effectively catch up.

The heads of three UN Agencies in Jordan - UNESCO, UNICEF and WHO – and the World Bank called on the Government of Jordan to avoid reversing years of progress in education by continuing to apply the safe reopening framework that seek to keep in-person learning at schools available for the majority of students. The longer that COVID-19 measures keep classrooms closed in Jordan, the greater the impact on children and youth.

“Time is of the essence to help children who have already lost almost two years of in-person learning. The focus must be on getting the most vulnerable children who are facing a shadow pandemic of child labour, early marriage and mental health issues, and are most at risk of dropping out, back to school,” said Tanya Chapuisat, Representative, UNICEF Jordan.

“The COVID-19 pandemic has already placed restrictions and immense pressures on children everywhere. Returning to school should be an exciting time for them and contributes to their physical and mental development. It’s where they get to learn, grow, interact with others. School closures in Jordan should not be considered an option like they were earlier in the pandemic, given that the country has been a regional leader in effectively preparing schools for reopening, with high vaccination coverage, guidance and training for teachers; hygiene and sanitation materials; as well as physical distancing and rotation,” said Dr Jamela Al-Raiby, WHO Representative to Jordan.

“Early indications from the recent mid-term review of Jordan’s Education Strategic Plan (ESP) already point to alarming learning and equity losses due to the pandemic. Stronger prioritization on reopening schools and keeping them open and mainstreaming of remedial education approaches within public schools will be critical especially for children from low-income households, children with special needs, and refugee children,” said Min Jeong Kim, Representative, UNESCO Jordan.

“Disruptions to instructional time in the classroom can have a severe impact on a child’s future ability to learn. Learning losses can far exceed the actual school closure time. The pandemic threatens to undo years of hard-earned progress in the education sector in Jordan, and further closures might reverse the important progress of remediation efforts and result in additional learning losses,” said Holly Benner, Resident Representative to Jordan, The World Bank.

The cost of keeping schools closed is significant as children who fall behind in their education are more likely to drop out, affecting Jordan’s human capital outcomes and the ability of young people to access jobs and economic opportunities in the longer term. Simulations suggest that students have lost up to 0.9 years of schooling in Jordan, adjusted for quality. It is estimated that in Jordan students’ future earnings may fall as much as 8 percent.

School closures disproportionately affect younger children, those with limited digital access, children with disabilities, girls, refugees, and children living in poverty. School is critical for children beyond learning – it helps them to socialize and develop, and for some children, school is the only place where they feel safe.

The multilateral agencies reiterated their continued support to the Ministry of Education to get all children back to learning in the second semester as soon as possible.

###

For more information, please contact:

For UNICEF Dima Salameh dsalameh@unicef.org +962 79 984 1703

For WHO Banan Kharabsheh kharabshehb@who.int +962799324142

For UNESCO Bettina Kittel b.kittel@unesco.org +962795673320

For WORLD BANK Nabeel Darweesh, +962-798-277-215, ndarweesh@worldbankgroup.org

About WORLD BANK

For more information, please visit: www.worldbank.org/jordan

Visit us on Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/WorldBankMiddleEastNorthAfrica

Be updated via Twitter: http://www.twitter.com/worldbankmena

For our YouTube channel: http://www.youtube.com/worldbank

About UNESCO

UNESCO is the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. It seeks to build peace through international cooperation in education, scientific collaboration, cultural dialogue and the free flow of information.

More information at www.unesco.org

About WHO

WHO leads global efforts to expand universal health coverage. We direct and coordinate the world’s response to health emergencies. And we promote healthier lives – from pregnancy care through old age. Our Triple Billion targets outline an ambitious plan for the world to achieve good health for all, using science-based policies and programmes.

For more information about WHO Jordan please visit http://www.emro.who.int/jor

Follow WHO Jordan on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram

About UNICEF

UNICEF works in some of the world’s toughest places, to reach the world’s most disadvantaged children. Across 190 countries and territories, we work for every child, everywhere, to build a better world for everyone.

For more information about UNICEF and its work for children, visit www.unicef.org/jordan

Follow UNICEF on Twitter and Facebook
Until now very few scientists have been able to locate, investigate and study coral reefs at depths of more than 30m. However, technology now means longer dives at these depths are possible. In total the team carried out dives totalling around 200 hours to study the reef and were able to witness the coral spawning. Further dives are planned in the coming months to continue investigations around the reef.

Unesco's action for the ocean

UNESCO is the UN agency in charge of ocean research. The Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO, founded in 1960 and joined by 150 countries, coordinates global programs such as ocean mapping and tsunami alert system, as well as numerous scientific research projects. The agency is also the guardian of unique ocean places, through 232 marine biosphere reserves and 50 marine World Heritage sites of Outstanding Universal Value. UNESCO leads the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development, from 2021 to 2030, which this year is reflected in the organization of several major international summits that will amplify the collective mobilization.

“1 Ocean, the anatomy” campaign

This campaign is led by explorer photographer Alexis Rosenfeld, in partnership with UNESCO for the Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development. Each year, until 2030, expeditions will be carried out across the ocean to bear witness to its assets for humanity, the threats it faces, but also the solutions we can provide.
The right to education must prevail even with the restrictions imposed by the pandemic. In many rural communities in the country, access to education remains limited due to the challenges posed by mobility, infrastructure, connectivity and lack of resources. Thus, it is necessary to rethink and transform educational models in order to achieve greater inclusion and permanence of students at different levels of the educational system.

Therefore, we celebrate with great satisfaction and commitment the alliances that strengthen digital education in Guatemala. Thanks to these public-private partnerships, education continues transforming lives. Through the use of HUAWEI tablets, female students will be able to access the IGER digital platform to continue their basic and high school studies, in addition to expanding their learning opportunities and developing their knowledge in the use of ICT.

Sustainable development is a commitment that involves us all. With the implementation of the UNESCO Malala Fund program for girls' right to education, we support the efforts of the country and the Ministry of Education to achieve the 2030 Agenda and Sustainable Development Goal 4. Motivating us to ensure inclusive, equitable and quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all.
On 13 January 2022, Cambodia Academy of Digital Technology (CADT) in collaboration with UNESCO, launched the initiative to conduct an Assessment of Internet Development in Cambodia using UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators. This assessment will provide a holistic diagnosis of Cambodia’s Internet policies and digital environment.

As part of this partnership, CADT will assess the situation of the Internet in Cambodia based on the R.O.A.M principles developed by UNESCO. The R.O.A.M -X principles refer to an internet that is human-Rights based, Open, Accessible, and governed by Multistakeholder participation. The assessment will also look into the situation of the internet regarding: gender equality, children’s specific needs, sustainable development, trust and security as well as legal and ethical aspects.

Once the assessment is completed, it will be published as a National Report, which will present a comprehensive and substantive understanding of the national Internet environment and policies; and based on that, provide policy recommendations and practical initiatives that will enable Cambodia to improve the national internet ecosystem as advanced ICTs evolve.

His Excellency Chun Vat, Secretary of State at the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications highlighted the importance of the research to support the implementation of Cambodia’s “Digital Economy and Society Policy Framework 2021-2035” which was launched by the Government in 2021. H.E Chun Vat pointed out that “this study, which will provide evidence-based policy recommendations from a multistakeholder perspective, will serve as a mirror reflecting and adjusting action along the way of the Framework’s implementation. More importantly, the findings of the assessment will contribute and provide the foundation for the design of future digital policies”.
Reports suggest both journalists were reporting on violence in Laboule 12, an area disputed by several gangs, when they were attacked by a criminal gang, fatally shot and their bodies were burned.

Amady was a reporter for Canadian broadcaster Radio Écoute FM while Louissaint worked for online media Télé Patriote and Tambou Verité.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi, g.godoi@unesco.org
Employed by Almaty TV, Bazarbayev was part of a team covering protests when the vehicle he was driving came under attack as protesters and security forces clashed. Another team member was injured in the attack.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity. It has also raised specific awareness on the risks faced by journalists covering protests, including through its recent policy brief: Safety of journalists covering protests : preserving freedom of the press during times of turmoil.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi, g.godoi@unesco.org
The UNESCO Observatory of Killed Journalists collected fifty-five journalist killings in 2021. Two-thirds of these took place in countries not experiencing armed conflict, showing the continued risks faced by journalists in their daily reporting to expose wrongdoing. This marks a complete reversal of the situation just a few years ago, in 2013, when two-thirds of killings took place in countries in conflict.

Two regions particularly affected

The majority of deaths in 2021 took place in just two regions – the Asia-Pacific, with 23 killings, and Latin America and the Caribbean, with 14.

If the number of journalist killings is at its lowest in over a decade, impunity for these crimes remains alarmingly widespread: UNESCO’s data shows 87% of all journalist killings since 2006 are still unresolved.

Multiple forms of violence

Journalists worldwide also continue to be subject to high rates of imprisonment, physical attack, intimidation and harassment, including when covering protests. Women journalists especially face a shocking prevalence of harassment online – a report released by UNESCO in April showed nearly three quarters of surveyed women journalists had experienced online violence linked to their work.

UNESCO is the United Nations agency with a global mandate to ensure freedom of expression and the safety of journalists worldwide and coordinates the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, which is marking its ten-year anniversary in 2022.

The Organization systematically condemns every journalist killing and calls upon the authorities to conduct a full investigation, provides training for journalists and judicial actors, works with governments to develop supportive policies and laws, and raises global awareness through events such as World Press Freedom Day, celebrated annually on 3 May.

Media contact: Clare O’Hagan, c.o-hagan@unesco.org
Sai Win Aung was covering the plight of refugees in the southeastern state of Kayin for the Federal News Journal when he was fatally shot in an artillery attack by the Myanmar armed forces, according to reports. Aung was the second journalist killed in Myanmar in December 2021.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi, g.godoi@unesco.org
The Director General of UNESCO, Ms Audrey Azoulay, and Ms Michelle Bachelet, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, continue to be deeply concerned for the well-being of two of their staff members who were detained in early November in Sana’a, Yemen. No communication from the UN has been possible with the staff members since that time.

Although the two staff members remain in custody, the UN has not received information about the grounds or legal basis for their detention, or their current status, despite earlier assurances by the Ansar Allah movement (who are also called Houthis) of their immediate release.

OHCHR and UNESCO recall the privileges and immunities accorded to staff of the UN system under international law, which are essential to the proper discharge of their official functions, and call for the staff members’ immediate release without any further delays.

Media contact: Clare O’Hagan,

c.o-hagan@unesco.org
Soe Naing, a freelance reporter and photographer, had been covering events in Myanmar since the military coup on 1 February 2021. He was arrested on 10 December while covering a silent demonstration to mark International Human Rights Day. He was held in a military interrogation centre and reportedly died after four days in detention.

Violence against journalists has increased in Myanmar this year.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi, g.godoi@unesco.org
New inscriptions on the List of Intangible Cultural Heritage in Need of Urgent Safeguarding:

Federated States of Micronesia — Carolinian wayfinding and canoe making

Carolinian wayfinding and canoe making refers to the centuries-old tradition of building and navigating long-distance canoes. Communities in Micronesia continue the indigenous traditions of building the ocean voyaging sailing canoes from local materials and of navigating, or wayfinding, with environmental cues rather than with maps or instruments. The canoes have a unique form and use dynamics quite unlike western craft. The asymmetrical design supports high-speed sailing and allows access to very shallow water. The practice is passed on through traditional apprenticeships lead by master canoe carvers and navigators who are organized into guilds.

Timor-Leste — Tais, traditional textile

Tais is the handwoven traditional textile of Timor-Leste. Used for decoration and to create traditional clothing for ceremonies and festivals, it is also a means of expressing cultural identity and social class, since the colours and motifs vary according to ethnic groups. Tais is made from cotton dyed with natural plants, and the complex process is traditionally reserved for women, who pass on the skills to the next generation in their communities. However, men sometimes participate by gathering plants to dye the cotton and by making the weaving equipment.

Estonia — Building and use of expanded dugout boats in the Soomaa region

The Estonian expanded dugout boat from the Soomaa region is a canoe-like boat, hollowed out from a single tree, with expanded sides and a shallow base. The most distinctive stage of the dugout boat construction is the expansion of the sides. With a combination of heat and moisture, the board of the dugout boat is significantly expanded, thus increasing its volume and maneuverability. Transmitted through apprenticeships and formal studies, dugout boat building and use is a communal activity that is accompanied by storytelling about legendary masters and their boats.

Mali — Cultural practices and expressions linked to the 'M’Bolon', a traditional musical percussion instrument

The M’Bbolon is a musical instrument used in southern Mali. It has a large calabash sound box covered with cowhide and a bow-shaped wooden neck with strings. The number of strings of the M’Bbolon determines how it is used. Single-stringed and two-stringed M’Bbolon are used for popular events and for rituals and religious ceremonies, whereas three-stringed and four-stringed M’Bbolon are used to accompany the praising of traditional chiefs, celebrate the heroic deeds of kings and accompany farmers in the fields. The instrument is taught through apprenticeships and by local associations.

The List of Intangible Cultural Heritage in Need of Urgent Safeguarding features elements of living heritage whose viability is under threat. It mobilizes international cooperation and assistance to strengthen the transmission of these cultural practices, in agreement with the concerned communities. This List now numbers 71 elements.

Elements added to the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, in order of inscription:

United Arab Emirates, Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Czechia, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Republic of Korea, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Morocco, Netherlands, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic – Falconry, a living human heritage

Falconry is the traditional art and practice of training and flying falcons and other birds of prey. Originally a means of obtaining food, falconry has acquired other values and has been integrated into communities as a recreational practice and a way of connecting with nature. Today, it is practiced by people of all ages in over eighty countries. Modern falconry focuses on safeguarding falcons, quarry and habitats as well as the practice itself. It is transmitted through mentoring, learning within families and formal training in clubs and schools.

Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen – Arabic calligraphy, knowledge, skills and practices

Arabic calligraphy is the artistic practice of handwriting Arabic script in a fluid manner to convey harmony, grace and beauty. Its fluidity offers infinite possibilities, even within a single word, since letters can be stretched and transformed to create different motifs. Arabic calligraphy is widespread in Arab and non-Arab countries and is practised by men and women of all ages. Originally intended to make writing clear and legible, it gradually became an Islamic Arab art for traditional and modern works. Skills are transmitted informally or through formal schools or apprenticeships.

Denmark; Finland; Iceland; Norway; Sweden — Nordic clinker boat traditions

Nordic clinker boats are small, open wooden boats between five and ten metres long. For almost two millenia, the people of the Nordic region have been building clinker boats using the same basic techniques: thin planks are fastened to a backbone of keel and stems, and the overlapping planks are fastened together with metal rivets, treenails or rope. A symbol of common Nordic coastal heritage, today’s clinker boats are primarily used in traditional festivities and sporting events. Traditionally, knowledge was transmitted through apprenticeships, but formal training from public and private specialized boat-building institutions is now available as well.

Democratic Republic of the Congo, Congo — Congolese rumba

Congolese rumba is a musical genre and a dance used in formal and informal spaces for celebration and mourning. It is primarily an urban practice danced by a male-female couple. Performed by professional and amateur artists, the practice is passed down to younger generations through neighbourhood clubs, formal training schools and community organisations. The rumba is considered an integral part of Congolese identity and a means of promoting intergenerational cohesion and solidarity.

Plurinational State of Bolivia — Grand Festival of Tarija

Bolivia’s Grand Festival of Tarija takes place every year in August and September, with devotional processions, festivals, competitions and fireworks. Transmitted through families and the church, the festival has its origins in the colonial period, when the inhabitants of Tarija entreated Saint Roch to cure diseases and protect their loved ones. It is characterized by lively music and dancing, regional crafts, traditional dishes and pilgrims dressed in colourful costumes and masks. In addition to its religious significance, the festival marks the beginning of the growing season.

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela – Festive cycle around the devotion and worship towards Saint John the Baptist

The Venezuelan Saint John the Baptist celebrations originated in the eighteenth century in Afro-Venezuelan communities. Viewed as a symbol of cultural resistance and freedom, the festivities are characterized by joyful drumming, dancing, storytelling and singing and by processions with a statue of Saint John the Baptist. On 23 June, the Sanjuaneros visit with friends and go to churches and religious centres. On 24 June, the image of the saint is baptized in the local river, to commemorate the biblical event. The practices and knowledge are transmitted within families and through community groups and schools.

Ecuador – Pasillo, song and poetry

The pasillo is a type of music and dance that emerged in Ecuador in the nineteenth century. It is a fusion of elements of indigenous music, such as the yaraví, with a variety of genres including the waltz, the minuet and the bolero. The music is usually accompanied by guitars and performed in ballroom dances, public events and outdoor concerts. In terms of lyrics, it is essentially a musicalized poem, with lyrics relating to love, the homeland and daily life. To Ecuadorians, the pasillo is an identity marker and a form of collective expression. It is transmitted within families, in formal training centres, and through musical groups.

Panama — Dances and expressions associated with the Corpus Christi Festivity

The Corpus Christi festival is a religious festival in Panama that celebrates the body and blood of Christ. It combines Catholic tradition with popular practices and is characterized by theatrical performances, burlesque dances and colourful costumes and masks. The festival starts with a theatrical performance depicting the battle between good and evil, followed by a procession and gatherings in the streets and in family homes. The related knowledge and skills are passed on through participation in the festival and the involvement of youth in dance groups and mask-making teams, among others.

Peru – Pottery-related values, knowledge, lore and practices of the Awajún people

The Awajún people view pottery as an example of their harmonious relationship with nature. The preparation process comprises five stages: the collection of materials, modelling, firing, decorating and finishing. Each stage has specific meanings and values. The pots are used for cooking, drinking, eating and serving food, as well as for rituals and ceremonies. The thousand-year-old practice has permitted the empowerment of Awajún women, who use it as a means of expressing their personality. The practice is transmitted by the Dukúg wisewomen, female elders who pass on their expertise to other women in their families.

Malaysia — Songket

Songket is a Malaysian fabric handwoven on a traditional, two-pedal floor loom. The decorative weaving technique used to make the fabric entails inserting gold or silver thread in between the base threads so that they seem to float over a colourful woven background. The technique, which dates back to the sixteenth century, is passed on from mother to daughter and through formal training programmes. Men participate by creating the weaving equipment. Songket is used in traditional clothing for ceremonies, festive occasions and formal state functions.

Indonesia—Gamelan

Gamelan refers to the traditional Indonesian percussion orchestra and to the set of musical instruments used. The ensemble typically includes xylophones, gongs, gong-chimes, drums, cymbals, string instruments and bamboo flutes. The music is played by men, women and children of all ages, and is typically used in religious rituals and public events. Gamelan is an integral part of Indonesian identity dating back centuries. Transmission is done in formal contexts in primary through to tertiary education and in informal contexts such as within families and during workshops.

Thailand — Nora, dance drama in southern Thailand

Nora is a centuries-old form of dance theatre and improvisational singing usually based on stories about the Buddha or legendary heroes. Performers wear colourful costumes with headdresses, bird-like wings, ornate scarves, and swan tails that give them a bird-like appearance. Performed in local community centres and at temple fairs and cultural events, nora is a community-based practice with deep cultural and social significance for the people of southern Thailand. Performances use regional dialects, music and literature to reinforce cultural life and social bonds. The practice is passed on by masters in homes, community organizations and educational institutions.

Viet Nam — Art of Xòe dance of the Tai people in Viet Nam

Xòe is a form of Vietnamese dancing that is performed at rituals, weddings, village festivals and community events. There are several types of xòe dances, but the most popular form is circle xòe, wherein dancers form a circle and perform basic movements that symbolize wishes for community health and harmony. An important identity marker for the Tai people in northwestern Viet Nam, the xòe dance is accompanied by various instruments, including gourd lutes, drums, cymbals and reed flutes. It is transmitted within families, dance troupes and schools.

India — Durga Puja in Kolkata

Durga Puja is an annual festival celebrated in the fall in India and Bangladesh. It marks the ten-day worship of the Hindu mother-goddess Durga. Characterized by Bengali drumming, large-scale installations and clay sculptures made from unfired clay from the Ganga River, the festival has come to signify ‘home-coming’ or a seasonal return to one’s roots. During the event, the divides of class, religion and ethnicities collapse as crowds of spectators walk around to admire the installations. Durga Puja is transmitted by families, art centres and traditional media, among others.

Sri Lanka — Traditional craftsmanship of making Dumbara Ratā Kalāla

Dumbara mats are traditional hand-made mats used as wall hangings, tapestries or cushion covers. Of great cultural significance for Sri Lankans, the mats are made by a community called kinnara that traditionally supplied ornamental mats to the royal palace between the fifteenth and nineteenth centuries. Today, artisans weave the mats for local buyers and tourists. Dumbara mats are made with the fibres of the hana plant and decorated with symbolic motifs and designs. The weaving techniques are transmitted from parents to children through observation and practice.

Turkmenistan – Dutar making craftsmanship and traditional music performing art combined with singing

Dutar is a traditional instrument and musical genre from Turkmenistan. The dutar instrument is a long-necked, two-stringed lute with a pear-shaped body covered by a thin wooden sounding board. The instrument is used in all of the main genres of Turkmen music and singing. As for dutar music, it can either be played alone or accompanied by singing or poetry and prose. Dutar music is an essential part of Turkmen ceremonies, national celebrations, festivals and social gatherings. Artisanry and related skills are traditionally passed on from father to son, and performance skills are transmitted orally and through demonstration.

Seychelles – Moutya

Moutya was brought to Seychelles by the enslaved Africans who arrived with the French settlers in the early eighteenth century. A sensual dance with simple choreography, it is traditionally performed around a bonfire to the beating of drums. Historically, moutya was a psychological comfort against hardship and a means of resisting social injustice. It is usually performed spontaneously within the community, as well as at gatherings and cultural events. Moutya is transmitted informally through performance, observation and imitation and formally through research, documentation and dissemination.

Madagascar – Malagasy Kabary, the Malagasy oratorical art

Malagasy kabary is a poeticized dialogue performed in front of an audience. It is highly structured and consists of proverbs, maxims, rhetorical figures and wordplay. Originally used by leaders to communicate with the community, it has become inseparable from social life in Madagascar, used for festivities, funerals, ceremonies and popular events. The practice, which is transmitted formally and informally through observation, usually involves two orators in front of a gathering. It can last several hours, depending on the type of event.

Senegal — Ceebu Jën, a culinary art of Senegal

Ceebu jën is an emblematic Senegalese dish. Although recipes vary from one region to the next, it is typically made with fish steak, broken rice, dried fish, mollusc and seasonal vegetables, such as onions, parsley, carrots, eggplant, white cabbage, cassava, sweet potato, okra and bay leaf. The recipe and techniques are traditionally passed down from mother to daughter. In most families, ceebu jën is eaten with the hands, although spoons or forks are usually used in restaurants. Viewed as an affirmation of Senegalese identity, the dish has become the national dish of Senegal.

Bahrain — Fjiri

Fjiri is a musical performance that commemorates the history of pearl diving in Bahrain. Viewed as a means of expressing the connection between the Bahraini people and the sea, the practice dates back to the late nineteenth century, it is usually performed and transmitted in cultural spaces called durs by descendants of pearl divers and pearling crews and by other individuals interested in preserving the tradition. During the performance, an all-male group of musicians sits in a circle, singing and playing percussion instruments. The centre of the circle is occupied by dancers and the lead singer.

Iraq—Traditional craft skills and arts of Al-Naoor

Al-naoor is a wooden wheel made of twenty-four columns and with clay jugs attached to its outer circumference. The wheel is used on the streams of the Euphrates River in Iraq, where water levels are lower than the adjacent fields. It is installed vertically on the streams of the river. As the current rotates the wheel, the jugs collect water, carry it to the top of the wheel, and pour it into the waterways leading to the fields. A source of livelihood for many, including local artisans, al-naoor knowledge and skills are transmitted through family, literature and formal education.

Palestine — The art of embroidery in Palestine, practices, skills, knowledge and rituals

In Palestine, women’s village clothing usually consists of a long dress, trousers, a jacket, a headdress and a veil. Each garment is embroidered with a variety of symbols including birds, trees and flowers. The embroidery is sewn with silk thread on wool, linen or cotton, and the choice of colours and designs indicates the woman’s regional identity and marital and economic status. Embroidery is a social and intergenerational practice around which women gather and collaborate to supplement their family’s income. The practice is transmitted from mother to daughter and through formal training courses.

Syrian Arab Republic — Al-Qudoud al-Halabiya

Al-Qudoud al-Halabiya is a form of traditional music from Aleppo with a fixed melody. Sung for religious and entertainment purposes with the accompaniment of a musical ensemble, the lyrics vary according to the type of event. Although it has been influenced by social changes, the qudoud has retained its traditional elements and continues to be performed throughout the city. It is a vital part of Aleppan culture and is viewed as a source of resilience, particularly in times of war. The practice is transmitted informally between mentors and youth and formally through school curricula, media broadcasts and programmes.

Morocco — Tbourida

Tbourida is a Moroccan equestrian performance dating back to the sixteenth century. It simulates a succession of military parades, reconstructed according to ancestral Arab-Amazigh conventions. During a tbourida, a troupe of riders perform a parade composed of an acrobatic arms drill and the simulation of a war departure. The riders wear period costumes and accessories representing their tribe or region, and the horses are bridled and saddled with traditional materials. Transmission takes place from generation to generation within families, through oral traditions and by observation.

Turkey — Hüsn-i Hat, traditional calligraphy in Islamic art in Turkey

The hüsn-i hat is the centuries-old art of calligraphy in Turkey. Traditional tools include a glazed paper, a reed pen, pen knives and soot ink. Many calligraphers, or hattats, make their own tools and play an important role in the transmission of the hüsn-i hat tradition, passing on their knowledge, craftsmanship skills and values through apprenticeships. The hüsn-i hat can be written on paper, leather, stone, marble, glass and wood, among others. It is traditionally used for religious and literary texts.

Finland — Kaustinen fiddle playing and related practices and expressions

Kaustinen folk music is a Finnish tradition of which the fiddle is the leading instrument. Based on playing by ear, it is characterized by syncopated and accented rhythms that are easy for people to dance to. Most inhabitants of Kaustinen and neighbouring communities consider it an essential aspect of their identity and a symbol of equality. Its distinctive style and technique have been transmitted formally and informally for over 250 years, and the music is performed in public and private contexts, including at the annual Folk Music Festival.

Denmark — Inuit drum dancing and singing

Drum dancing and drum singing are traditional forms of Inuit artistic expression in Greenland. Frequently featured in celebrations and social events, they can be performed by an individual or group. During a drum dance, the drum, or qilaat, is moved in different directions and its frame is struck to produce a sharp, echoing beat. The drum song is a lyrical narration of daily life. For Greenlandic Inuit, drum dancing and singing represents a shared identity and a sense of community. The practice is passed on through cultural associations, clubs, dance studios and institutions.

Malta — L-Għana, a Maltese folksong tradition

Għana is used to describe three related types of rhymed folksong in Malta. The most popular form is the ‘quick-wit’ għana, an improvised duel between one or two pairs of singers, focusing on rhymes, convincing argumentation and witty repartee. Għana sessions are held year-round in public and private venues and are viewed as a platform for informal social and political debate and reflection on shared history. An integral part of Maltese culture, the practice is transmitted through families and is considered vital to the preservation of the unique Semitic Maltese language.

Portugal — Community festivities in Campo Maior

The Community Festivities of Campo Maior is a popular event during which the streets of Campo Maior in Portugal are decorated with millions of colourful paper flowers. The community’s street commissions decide the date and colour themes, and neighbours work on the decorations for months. There is a sense of friendly competition between streets to see which one will have the best design. The decorations are thus kept secret until the eve of the festivities, when the town is transformed overnight. The practice strengthens creativity and community belonging, and is transmitted within families and schools.

Tajikistan — Falak

Falak, meaning ‘heaven’, ‘fortune’ and ‘universe’, is the traditional folklore music of the mountain people of Tajikistan. The expressive and philosophical musical genre may be performed by a male or female soloist, a cappella, with a single instrumental accompaniment or with an ensemble and dancers. Characterized by their high range, falak songs most often relate to love, pain, suffering and the homeland. The practice is viewed as a state of mind and an identity marker for mountain communities, and it is passed from one generation to the next within families and through formal education.

Bulgaria — Visoko multipart singing from Dolen and Satovcha, South-western Bulgaria

Visoko is a traditional practice of multipart singing that is unique to the Bulgarian villages of Dolen and Satovcha. There are three types: low-pitched, high-pitched, and a combination of the two. Visoko songs, also known as summer songs, were traditionally sung outdoors by women working in the fields. Today, the practice is passed on to women and girls through local singing groups. It is emblematic of local musical practice and creates a sense of community among singers in the groups while contributing to social ties between the singers and their audiences.

Ukraine — Ornek, a Crimean Tatar ornament and knowledge about it

Örnek is a Ukrainian system of symbols and their meanings, used in various mediums such as embroidery, weaving and pottery. The symbols are arranged to create a narrative composition. There are around thirty-five symbols in total, each with its unique meaning and connotations. The Crimean Tatar communities understand the meaning of the symbols and often commission artisans to create certain compositions with specific meanings. The practice and knowledge are transmitted by skilled artisans within families and communities, in informal contexts such as embroidery classes, and in formal contexts such as universities.

Belgium — Namur stilt jousting

Namur stilt jousting is a Belgian tradition dating back to the early fifteenth century. During a joust, participants attempt to knock all the members of the opposing team to the ground. Jousts usually take place during festivals in the streets and squares of Namur. Entry is free, and spectators gather around the jousting zone and cheer on their favourite teams. Stilt jousting is a strong marker of Namur’s identity and is seen as a factor of cohesion. The practice is transmitted through trainings at the local stilt jousting association as well as through family tradition and in schools.

Italy – Truffle hunting and extraction in Italy, traditional knowledge and practice

Italian truffle hunting and extraction is a set of practices that has been transmitted orally for centuries. With the help of a dog, the truffle hunters, or tartufai, identify the areas where the underground fungus grows. They then use a spade to extract the truffles without disturbing the soil conditions. A source of revenue for many rural communities, truffle hunting involves a wide range of skills and knowledge related to the management of natural ecosystems. It is also associated with popular feasts that mark the beginning and end of the truffle season.

Netherlands — Corso culture, flower and fruit parades in the Netherlands

Dating back to the late nineteenth century, a corso is an annual Dutch parade and competition of elaborate floats or boats decorated with flowers, fruit, vegetables and, in some cases, people in costumes. The practice creates a sense of social cohesion and solidarity, as groups of friends or entire neighbourhoods often spend months preparing floats up to 20 metres long and 10 metres high. Corso culture is passed on through apprenticeships, school programmes and participation in the annual parade, which takes place on streets or in rivers and is typically accompanied by bands and theatre performances.

Uzbekistan – Bakhshi art

Bakhshi is the performance of epic stories with the accompaniment of traditional musical instruments. The storytellers, also called bakhshis, recount heroic, historical and romantic epic poems based on myths, legends, folk tales and legendary chants. Successful bakhshis must be able to captivate listeners with their melodies and to narrate stories in an interesting and original way. Bakhshi is a vital part of Uzbek lifestyle, and the storytellers are always welcome guests in family ceremonies, rituals, public holidays and local festivities. The practice is passed on within families and through formal bakhshi schools.

Montenegro – Cultural Heritage of Boka Navy Kotor: a festive representation of a memory and cultural identity

Boka Navy is a traditional NGO founded in 809. Comprised of a community of seafarers, it has played a vital role in preserving and promoting maritime history and tradition. The organization is also the backbone of the annual St. Tryphon festivities. During formal celebrations, members wear traditional uniforms, carry historic weapons and perform a traditional circle dance. Membership is voluntary and open to men, women and children of all ages. Knowledge and skills are transmitted from generation to generation within families and through Boka Navy committees, which organize trainings, exhibitions, conferences and publications.

Poland – Flower carpets tradition for Corpus Christi processions

The tradition of arranging flower carpets is inherently linked to the feast of Corpus Christi in Poland. For the feast, which involves a mass followed by a procession, families in several villages use flowers to arrange colourful and symbolic carpets on the route of the procession. The tradition unites the entire community and has shaped local identity. The practice has been passed on for generations, especially within families. Pattern-making workshops are also regularly held in schools, with support from the parish and non-governmental organizations.

Haiti —Joumou soup

The Intergovernmental Committee decided this inscription based on the advice of the Evaluation body and following a fast-track procedure given the specific circumstances due to the hardships recently endured by the country.

Joumou or giraumon soup is a traditional Haitian pumpkin soup made with vegetables, plantains, meat, pasta and spices. It is a celebratory dish, deeply rooted in Haitian identity, and its preparation promotes social cohesion and belonging among communities. Originally reserved for slave owners, Haitians took ownership of the soup when they gained independence from France, turning it into a symbol of their newly acquired freedom and an expression of their dignity and resilience. It is made from giraumon, a variety of pumpkin once cultivated by the indigenous peoples of the Caribbean, and is prepared and consumed specifically on the first of January – Haiti’s Independence Day – when it constitutes the first meal of the year. It also serves as traditional Sunday breakfast. The preparation of Joumou soup is a family and community affair: women manage the overall activities, children help to prepare the ingredients, artisans make the aluminium pots and other utensils used to prepare the soup, and farmers work the land to harvest the vegetables. Today, several variations of the soup can be found in Caribbean and Latin American cuisines.

The Representative List seeks to enhance visibility for the traditions and know-how of communities. The List now numbers 530 elements.

Inscriptions on the Register of Good Safeguarding Practices:

Philippines — The School of Living Traditions (SLT)

In 1995, the Sub-commission on Cultural Communities and Traditional Arts of the National Commission for Culture and the Arts – the lead agency mandated to preserve, promote and develop Philippine culture and the arts – affirmed the need to safeguard traditional knowledge and practices from rapid cultural devaluation. This paved the way for the School of Living Traditions programme, involving informal, community-managed learning centres where practitioners can transmit their communities’ knowledge, intangible cultural heritage, skills and values to younger generations.

Kyrgyzstan – Nomad games, rediscovering heritage, celebrating diversity

Kyrgyz people’s cultural heritage is intrinsically linked to the nomadic lifestyle. However, during the Soviet era, which came with forced sedentation, many elements became endangered, including traditional games. Traditional game practitioners and knowledge bearers held their first major meeting in 2007 to discuss current challenges and safeguarding needs for the traditional nomad games. These discussions shaped the Nomad Games: Rediscovering Heritage programme, which focused on documentation and identification of the variety of traditional games in different parts of the country.

Islamic Republic of Iran – National programme to safeguard the traditional art of calligraphy in Iran

With the advent of technology, the tradition of Iranian calligraphy gradually declined. The safeguarding of the Iranian calligraphic tradition thus became a major concern in the 1980s, and a national programme was developed for this purpose by NGOs in collaboration with the government. This programme aimed to expand informal and formal public training in calligraphy, publish books and pamphlets, hold art exhibitions, and develop academic curricula while promoting appropriate use of the calligraphic tradition in line with modern living conditions.

Kenya – Success story of promoting traditional foods and safeguarding traditional foodways in Kenya

In Kenya, traditional foodways were under threat. Understanding that a decline in food diversity and knowledge would have serious ramifications on health and on food and nutrition insecurity, in 2007 Kenya committed to safeguarding related practices. Two main initiatives were launched, in collaboration with scientists and communities. The first involved inventorying traditional foods and their uses, and the second entailed working with primary schools to identify and inventory traditional foodways. Both initiatives have led to related activities carried out independently by local institutions.

The Register of Good Safeguarding Practices allows States Parties, communities and other stakeholders to share successful safeguarding experiences and examples of how they surmounted challenges faced in the transmission of their living heritage, its practice and knowledge to the future generation. The Register now features 29 good practices.
As a ten-day celebration, Durga Puja represents the collective worship of the Hindu Goddess Durga. During this time, masterfully designed clay models of the Goddess are worshipped in “pandals” or pavilions where communities get together and celebrate. Several folk music, culinary, craft, and performing arts traditions add to the dynamism of this celebration.

While Durga Puja is one of the most important festivals of West Bengal, India, it is widely observed across the country and in major cities of the world by the Bengali diaspora. Over the years, the Indian city of Kolkata has emerged as the geographical and cultural heart of the national and global celebrations of the festival.

The Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity currently has 492 elements. It includes forms of expression that testify to the diversity of intangible heritage and raises awareness of its importance. By enhancing the visibility of communities’ cultural practices and know-how, UNESCO aims to safeguard the intangible cultural heritage of communities globally.

The 2003 UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage promotes the protection of knowledge and skills necessary for traditional artisanship and cultural practices transmitted from generation to generation, such as oral traditions, performing arts, social practices, rituals and festive events, and knowledge and practices concerning nature and the universe.

Useful links:

• About Intangible Cultural Heritage

• 2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage

Media contact:

Rekha Beri, Public Information Officer
As part of UNESCO’s ongoing efforts to support for creation of “Reviving Mosul and Basra Old Cities” project, with financial support from the European Union, a four-day training workshop on TVET Curriculum Development was organized in Erbil from 8 – 11 December 2021. The trainees were 20 technical staff (5 women) from Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (MoLSA) and the Vocational Training Centres (VTCs) and Ministry of Education.

The workshop enhanced the capacities of the MoLSA, VTC and MoE technical staff to review and develop the TVET curriculum as per the requirements of the national Technical and Vocational Qualification Framework (TVQF). The TVQF was approved by the Iraqi Council of Ministries in March 2021.

The training methodology included an interactive set of activities, enabling the participants to apply the new processes tools in a practical manner. Throughout the training participants were required to reflect on the current labor market needs which would result in improved employment outcomes for young people.

In his opening remarks, Mr. Bilal Al Hamaydah, the Project Officer, welcomed the participants, and said “This workshop aims to build the capacities of the curriculum developers team at the level of Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs and the vocational training centers extending at the level of the Iraqi governorates, as well as a specialized cadre from the Ministry of Education in order to strengthen the capacities regarding curriculum review and development mechanisms of vocational training centers and vocational preparatory schools in accordance with the National Technical and Vocational Qualifications Framework”.

Mr. Al Hamaydah added “UNESCO hopes, through this workshop, that the main output will be an expansion of this knowledge through the dissemination of tools and the application of what the participants have learned within the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs and the vocational training centers in order to disseminate these tools, guiding notes and guidelines for the National Qualifications Framework regarding Technical and vocational education and training curriculum development in Iraq.”

Dr. Esraa Talib Tawfeeq, the Scientific Assistant of the General Directorate of Curricula at MoE, said “As a representative of the Ministry of Education, I participated in this workshop to benefit from and access national technical and vocational qualifications framework theoretically and practically. The benefit of this framework is to be used in aligning current curriculum and in developing new curriculum in the future. The Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs participated in the workshop which lasted for 4 days. The materials provided were used in theory and practical application, which had the greatest advantage in the use of curriculum development using the National Technical and Vocational Qualifications Framework”.

Mr. Muhammed Ghazi Harfash, Engineer from the Department of Labor and Vocational Training, Baghdad Governorate, said “As a participant in the curriculum development workshop within the National Qualifications Framework, I hope that there will be a great opportunity for such an organized work inside the country and we hope for the best from this workshop through our experience in designing curricula and access of the National Qualifications Framework after its approval”.

Ms. Aseel Abdul Kareem, the Curriculum Officer at Basra Training Center, said, the workshop was wonderful and she and her colleagues greatly benefited from the topics covered in increasing awareness and understanding of the National Qualifications Framework and its relationship to curriculum development and its compatibility with the labor market.

The trainer, Dr. Nadhom Khaleefa Mutalib, from Middle Technical University - Anbar Technical Institute appreciated the active participation of all participants and the great outputs of the workshop which reflected reaching the objective of the Curriculum Development Workshop to increase awareness and understanding of Technical and Vocational Education and Training operational governance frameworks, systems and processes that guide and inform the development of curriculum or qualifications.

Melanie Relton, the Education Consultant, Assessor, Moderator and Verifier, said “workshops of these kinds play an essential role in supporting professionals and institutions implement the requirements of the TVQF. In a globally competitive market, adopting the standards and principles outlined in the TVQF will enhance the transparency, understanding, credibility and portability of Iraqi qualifications and assure employers that students graduating with the new qualifications genuinely possess the skills and experience needed to perform within the workplace.”

In his closing remarks, the Director of Scientific Affairs Department - Curriculum Officer – at General Directorate of Vocational Education, Ministry of Education, Dr. Ihsan Al Nuaimi, said “The training workshop was wonderful as we saw a high coordination between UNESCO and the facilitators and participants from the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs and the Ministry of Education. The workshop adopted a competency-based training approach for the purpose of clearly understanding the National Qualifications Framework and the requirements of the Iraqi labor market for the required professions, especially as we are going through a crisis regarding the weakness of the private sector and also to improve professions in Iraq, which leads to the improvement of the Iraqi economy.”
Malabanan, a highly regarded national and international news reporter, was killed by an unknown assassin while watching television in his family shop. He had notably contributed to Reuters news agency articles about the war on drugs, which were awarded the Pulitzer Prize in 2018.

Malabanan is the third journalist killed in connection with his work in the Philippines this year.

UNESCO promotes the safety of journalists through global awareness-raising, capacity building and a range of actions, notably in the framework of the UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

See also: UNESCO observatory of killed journalists

Media contact: Guilherme Canela de Souza Godoi, g.godoi@unesco.org
New Delhi, 15 Dec 2021: A two-day capacity building workshop focusing on the means to combat the illicit trafficking of cultural property in South Asia opened today at the UNESCO House, with an inaugural session held in the presence of senior government officials and experts, representatives of international organisations and diplomatic missions.

Entitled “Returning the Loot”, and based on the principles of the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, the gathering of experts aims to raise awareness on the need to strengthen national legislation and tighten controls, establish greater regional cooperation, and strengthen security in museums and at heritage sites.

While at the global amount of global sales of art and antiquities was recorded at US$ 50 .1 billion in 2020, experts agree that illicit trafficking of cultural property is one of the world’s biggest illegal enterprises. Today, illicit trafficking in cultural property is depriving peoples of their heritage and history and often makes scientific and archaeological work irremediably impossible. In addition to this, this scourge can contribute to finance terrorist organisations.

According to INTERPOL figures, 854,742 cultural objects were seized globally by law enforcement agencies in 2020, but the illicit traffic and looting of cultural heritage increased dramatically in the last decade all over the world, owing in part to globalisation of the marketplace, with easier flows of capital. More recently, the vulnerability of security at sites and museums during the COVID-19 pandemic has also been a point of concern.
A regional training for 22 tourist guides from Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan took place in Samarkand, Uzbekistan from 22 to 26 November, 2021.

The event was held within the framework of the project "Silk Road Heritage Corridors in Afghanistan, Central Asia and Iran - International Dimension of the European Year of Cultural Heritage" implemented by UNESCO with the financial support of the European Union.

The training in Samarkand was the culmination of the “WFTGA Hands on Tourist Guiding (HOT) Training for the Silk Roads Heritage Guides”, which was launched online in August 2020 in partnership with the World Federation of Tourist Guide Associations (WFTGA).

The goal of the course was to train heritage guides to interpret the cultural and natural heritage along the Silk Roads.

The five-day training featured communication seminars, practical sessions, and a rigorous exam.

After completing the course, the guides plan to actively help visitors and tourists understand the diverse historical and cultural value of the Silk Road. As part of the course, a training handbook for Silk Road guides has been published in English and Russian. The manual is available for download at: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000374500

Feedback from course participants:

"The WFTGA training was very informative: at the beginning they gave us general information about cultural heritage before discussing each topic in more detail. They explained the basic tenets of working as a guide, and most importantly, what the mission of the profession is. They explained the guiding terms that we might encounter during our work. This really helped us make our own conclusions about societal and legal matters relevant to our profession. Contemporary topics included inclusivity, sustainable development in tourism, and making tourism accessible for all.”

- Zhanar, Kazakhstan

"I really enjoyed the course. I’ve now incorporating some innovative approaches into both my tours and my teaching methodology. A lot of returning tourists noticed a significant improvement in how tours were conducted before and after the training.”

- Lada, Kyrgyzstan

"The training was very interesting and versatile consisting of informative lectures and recommended literature. I also learned a lot about the specifics of a tourist’s guide work. I met interesting people from different countries, and it was a fascinating experience. After the training I came up with an idea for a new project through which people can learn more about my home country."

- Kurbon, Tajikistan

“I had an unforgettable experience during the training. Our trainers were very experienced and imparted important lessons about the techniques to use during tours.”

- Sobir, Uzbekistan

The training participants also spoke highly of the trainers’ experience and methodology, networking opportunities with representatives of different countries, and the organization of the event.

Contact persons:

Ms Muhayyo Makhmudova, Culture Programme Specialist, UNESCO Tashkent Office;

Tel: (+99878) 1207116, 1207154, 1207155; e-mail: m.makhmudova@unesco.org

Ms Tatyana Abbasova, Consultant of Cultural Unit, UNESCO Office in Uzbekistan;

Tel: (+99878) 1207116, 1207154, 1207155, email: t.abbasova@unesco.org

Ms Gulmira Rymbayeva, Silk Road Project Coordinator. UNESCO Almaty Office

Telephone: +7 727 2582643 ext. 1403 (office); e-mail: g.rymbayeva@unesco.org

Ms Didar Kul-Mukhammed, Didar, Silk Road Project PR Specialist. UNESCO Almaty Office

Telephone: +7 727 2582643; e-mail: d.kul-mukhammed@unesco.org
WASHINGTON/AMMAN/BEIRUT, December 7, 2021 – The unprecedented disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic could lead to children in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region losing an additional year of learning outcomes, according to a new report launched by the World Bank, UNICEF, and UNESCO. This loss is as a result of extended school closures despite governments’ best efforts to provide remote learning including through digital platforms

The COVID education crisis came on top of the pre-existing learning crisis in the Middle East and North Africa where students were already at risk of poor learning outcomes. Even before the pandemic, nearly 15 million children between the ages of five to14 were out of school and nearly two-thirds of children across the region were unable to read with proficiency. An additional 10 million children were at risk of dropping out of school, due to poverty and social marginalization, as well as displacement and disruption caused by ongoing armed conflicts.

Analysis in the report shows widened inequalities for children and youth, including digital disparities, which risk doing long-term harm to children and youth. During the pandemic, around 40 percent of children – some 39 million children and adolescents – did not benefit from remote learning primarily due to digital poverty.

While global evidence indicates higher than projected learning losses arising from COVID-19, no systematic evidence is available to date on the impact that school closures have had on students in MENA. Further, there was not enough capacity to monitor and collect evidence of continued learning through remote teaching and other measures.

This joint report, COVID-19 Learning Losses: Rebuilding Quality Learning for All in the Middle East and North Africa, aims to help fill the evidence gap. It summarizes country responses to the education crisis due to the pandemic, estimates the potential learning loss and presents recommendations including on improved access for students, engagement of students, and an enabling environment for children to learn and thrive.

“COVID-19 exacerbated the challenges faced by school children across the Middle East and North Africa, creating a crisis within a crisis,” said Keiko Miwa, World Bank Regional Director for Human Development for the Middle East and North Africa. “Learning poverty in MENA is estimated to increase by over 10 percentage points, from the pre-pandemic level of 60 percent to 71. As countries in the region continue to grapple with the impacts of the pandemic and chart their paths toward an inclusive recovery, the urgency to act is now. Recovering and accelerating learning will require a transformation, and the World Bank will continue to work with our development partners and client countries as they build strong, resilient, equitable, and effective education systems to ensure quality learning for all.”

The simulations presented in the report project worsening education outcomes for millions of children in the region. The potential impact on children, many of whom were already vulnerable and disadvantaged, goes beyond education to encompass consequences for their mental health, well-being, socialization, and labor market participation and expected lifetime earnings. Losses are projected to be as high as US$1 trillion for the region as a whole, in the worst-case scenario.

“The reopening of schools is so critical, not only for children’s education but also for their wellbeing. It is not enough to simply reopen classroom doors. School should be a safe place for children: to learn, play, and make friends. Those in charge should uphold their duties and responsibilities for the well-being, welfare, and safety of the children under their care during learning hours” said Ted Chaiban, UNICEF Regional Director for the Middle East and North Africa. “In addition to resources for schools operations, a strategic shift is needed to reinforce life skills and the reduction of digital poverty, including through expanding internet bandwidth and making digital devices and equipment more available and affordable to all to bridge the digital gap”.

The safe reopening of schools should be countries’ highest priority. The cost of keeping schools closed is steep and threatens to hamper a generation of children and youth while widening pre-pandemic disparities. Growing evidence indicates that with adequate measures, health risks to children and education staff can be minimized. Reopening is the single best measure countries can take to begin reversing learning losses.

“It is imperative that we do not backslide, and instead we must work together to ensure that the realization of our target for SDG 4 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is met. We must offer evidence and guidance to orient our collective work and ensure that we build back better,” said Costanza Farina, UNESCO Regional Director for Education in the Arab States.

To tackle the learning crisis, countries in the region must first address the data gaps, by assessing students’ learning levels. It is critical for policymakers, school administrators and teachers to have access to their students’ learning data disaggregated by sub-groups of students, so that they can target instruction and accelerate students’ learning recovery. UNESCO, UNICEF, and the World Bank have formed the Learning Data Compact to provide coordinated support on closing learning data gaps.

For more information on the global education crisis, please see the recently launched The State of Global Education: From Crisis to Recovery report.

About UNESCO

UNESCO is the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. It seeks to build peace through international cooperation in Education, the Sciences and Culture. UNESCO develops educational tools to help people live as global citizens free of hate and intolerance. It works so that each child and citizen has access to quality education. By promoting cultural heritage and the equal dignity of all cultures, UNESCO strengthens bonds among nations. UNESCO stands up for freedom of expression, as a fundamental right and a key condition for democracy and development. More on www.en.unesco.org/

About the World Bank Group

The World Bank Group plays a key role in the global effort to end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity. It consists of five institutions: the World Bank, including the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International Development Association (IDA); the International Finance Corporation (IFC); the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA); and the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). Working together in more than 100 countries, these institutions provide financing, advice, and other solutions that enable countries to address the most urgent challenges of development. For more information, please visit www.worldbank.org, www.miga.org, and ifc.org

About UNICEF

UNICEF works in some of the world’s toughest places, to reach the world’s most disadvantaged children. Across more than 190 countries and territories, we work for every child, everywhere, to build a better world for everyone.

Contacts:

UNESCO:

In Beirut: Bechara Maroun, +961-1-850013 ext 114, b.maroun@unesco.org

World Bank:

In Washington: Serene Jweied, +1-202-473-8764, sjweied@worldbankgroup.org

UNICEF:

In Amman: Juliette Touma, +962-79-867-4628, jtouma@unicef.org
A call for renewed collective commitment towards Inclusion and Diversity in Education in Jordan

Amman – On the occasion of the International Day of Persons with Disabilities, which takes place on 3 December every year, the Ministry of Education (MoE), the Higher Council for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (HCD), the GIZ- Promoting Quality in Inclusive Education (PROMISE) in Jordan Programme, and UNESCO reaffirm their commitment to continue in their efforts to promote an inclusive learning environment that embraces the diversity among all children and youth, including children and youth with disabilities.

According to a recently released report by (UNICEF), nearly 240 million children worldwide, or one in 10, live with disabilities and face challenges in their right to access quality education and learn jointly with their peers due to discriminatory social practices, a lack of educational policies and strategies, stigma, inadequate physical infrastructure, and curricula.

Throughout the past years, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan made great strides towards fulfilling its commitments towards Inclusion and Diversity in Education. Within this framework, and with support from GIZ, the MoE and HCD, in the presence of national and international partners, launched the 10-Year National Strategy for Inclusive Education (IES) for 2020-2030. The IES was designed in line with the national Law on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities No. 20 for the Year 2017 and the global Sustainable Development Goal No. 4 that aims to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote life-long learning opportunities for all.

Inclusion and Diversity in Education can empower children and youth with disabilities and their families and enable them to realize their right to quality education and learning. It can provide them with a safe learning environment, equipping them with the required skills and knowledge to grow independently and play a productive role in their communities.

Jordan is working on an ambitious plan that calls for continuous collective action at school, community and institutional level. The MoE, HCD, GIZ-PROMISE Programme and UNESCO are joining hands to ensure that all learners’ needs are addressed, regardless of their abilities, disabilities, gender, background or circumstances. Children and youth should be supported to develop their individual potential so no one is left behind, excluded from or within the education system. We are joining hands to make sure that all children and youth, particularly children and youth with disabilities, can enjoy their right and access to quality inclusive education.

Making Inclusion and Diversity in Education a reality in Jordanian schools will not happen overnight – it is a process that demands the dedication and collective commitment from institutions, teachers, principals, parents, pupils and the whole community, alike. Together with the MoE, HCD and UNESCO, the GIZ-PROMISE programme has begun supporting 18 primary and secondary public schools in Marka, Ajloun and Al-Karak through which further inclusion and diversity in education, as well as innovation, will be piloted, focusing on strengthening systems and capacities that can be replicated across the Kingdom.

Furthermore, GIZ and UNESCO will support the MoE and HCD in developing comprehensive capacity development approaches and tools, to benefit teachers and other education personnel. Fostering innovation, inclusion and diversity in education, through targeted trainings and mentoring at national and sub-national levels, will contribute to better equip teachers with the required knowledge and competences to manage their classroom and the diverse needs of children and youth.

A national awareness campaign is currently being designed and developed. Several activities will also target Disabled Peoples Organizations (DPOs) and parents through community engagement activities to raise their awareness and strengthen their knowledge on Inclusive Education.

Since the initial outbreak of COVID-19 last year, children and youth in Jordan were heavily affected, with the situation being worse for children and youth with disabilities. MoE, HCD, UNESCO and GIZ-PROMISE Programme acknowledge that inclusion is a process; a long journey that requires time and concerted efforts to bring about long-term change and impact. They also believe that the time has come to collectively join forces to design and build effective and sustainable measures towards an education system and a society embracing inclusion and diversity throughout Jordan.
UNESCO’s Global Education Monitoring (GEM) Report warns of growing inequality and exclusion due to high costs of private education and weak regulation by states. It advocates five measures to ensure the provision of quality education for all.

40% of pre-primary pupils, 20% of primary pupils and 30% of secondary and tertiary students are now educated in non-state schools worldwide. However, UNESCO’s new Global Education Monitoring (GEM) Report shows that many countries lack adequate regulations on private education or the capacity to enforce them, undermining quality and potentially widening the educational divide between rich and poor.

The Report analyses non-state actors across all education systems, ranging from schools run by faith-based organizations, NGOs, philanthropies and for-profit commercial entities, to all those involved in the provision of services to the education sector. Many countries let these schools, most of them not registered, operate without any oversight.

It reveals that only 27% of countries explicitly prohibit profit making in primary and secondary schools, which runs counter to the vision of 12 years of free education for all. Over half of countries prevent student admission procedures in schools. Only 7% of countries have quotas that enhance access to schools for disadvantaged students through initiatives. Only half have regulations on private tuition.

Consequently, households in least developed countries spend a disproportionate amount of their income on educating their children. Households account for 39% of education expenditure in low- and lower-middle-income countries compared to 16% in high income countries.

The Report, entitled Who Chooses? Who Loses?, demonstrates that, at the same time, public education in low-income countries comes with considerable hidden costs. Analysis of 15 low and middle-income countries shows, for example, that school uniforms and supplies accounted for almost two-fifths of households’ educational expenditure.

This requires 8% of families in low- and middle-income countries to borrow money to pay for their children to go to school.
Today on 10 December 2021 UNESCO jointly with the State Inspectorate for Supervision of Quality in Education of Uzbekistan organized High-level Expert Meeting on strengthening stakeholder partnerships to ratify and implement the Convention on recognition of Higher Educational Qualifications to promote the recognition of higher educational qualifications in Uzbekistan.

The UNESCO Asia-Pacific Regional Convention on the Recognition of Qualifications in Higher Education (the Tokyo Convention) provides a mechanism for countries in the Asia-Pacific region to facilitate recognition of higher education qualifications through basic principles, increased information provision and transparency. Ratification of the Convention demonstrates a country’s commitment to improved mobility of students and academics within Asia and the Pacific, while also strengthening collaboration and solidarity across the region. The Convention entered into force on 1 Feb 2018. As of August 2021, twelve Member States – Afghanistan, Armenia, Australia, China, Fiji, the Holy See, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Mongolia, New Zealand, the Russian Federation, and Turkey have ratified the Tokyo Convention.

Ratification of this Convention will facilitate wider student mobility in the region, promote enhancing the quality assurance in the higher education provision and facilitate employment opportunities of Uzbek graduates in other States party to the Tokyo Convention.

Meeting objectives:

Raise national-level awareness and capacity with regards to the benefits, challenges, and ratification procedures of the Tokyo Convention and Global Convention on recognition of Higher Educational Qualifications;

Promotion of key national outreach mechanisms such as a National Information Centre (NIC) to provide authoritative information on higher education and the recognition of qualifications;

Discussion of the draft roadmap on the institutional arrangements required to ratify the recognition Conventions;

Strengthening the role of quality assurance in education systems to build trust in qualifications domestically and across borders.

Stakeholders from higher education institutions and technical experts shared their insights and exchange views on emerging priorities for Uzbekistan.

This significant meeting assessed related gaps and needs in Uzbekistan for quality-assured higher education.
The Intangible Cultural Heritage Committee will meet online from 13 to 18 December to examine 55 new applications for inscription submitted by States Parties to the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage. A press conference will be held on Monday 13 December at 5.30 at the start of the Committee session.

The Intergovernmental Committee’s annual meeting will continue through 18 December and be chaired by Punchi Nilame Meegaswatte, Secretary-General of Sri Lanka’s National Commission for UNESCO.

The 24 members of the Committee, representatives elected from among the 180 States Parties to the Convention, will examine a total of 55 requests for inscription this year:

45 requests for inclusion on the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity,

5 requests for the List of Intangible Cultural Heritage in Need of Urgent Safeguarding

5 nominations to the Register of Good Safeguarding Practices.

The Committee will also examine three requests for international financial assistance submitted by Mongolia for bii biyelgee (a traditional folk dance inscribed in 2009 as requiring urgent safeguarding), by Timor-Leste for tais (a traditional fabric, pending application) and by Djibouti for Xeedho (the preparation of a culinary dish, application pending).

Press conference and announcement of inscriptions

To access the press conference on 13 December, starting at 5.30pm CET (4.30 UTC) will be accessible please use the following: https://unesco-org.zoom.us/j/98163476578

New inscriptions will be announced live on Twitter on the @unesco and @unesco_fr during the Committee’s session, which will also be streamed here: https://ich.unesco.org/en/16com. A press release with a recap of new inscriptions will be published at the close of Committee meeting.

Press resources can be found at the following link: https://ich.unesco.org/en/press-resources-01214.

Video footage of items due to be inscribed is available here: https://en.unesco.org/pressroom/brolls/intangible-heritage .

The Intangible Cultural Heritage Convention in brief

The Convention promotes the safeguarding of knowledge and skills necessary for traditional craftsmanship and cultural practices transmitted from generation to generation, such as oral traditions, performing arts, social practices, rituals and festive events, and knowledge and practices concerning nature and the universe.

The Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity currently has 492 inscribed elements. It aims to give greater visibility to communities’ cultural practices and know-how.

To date, the List of Intangible Cultural Heritage in Need of Urgent Safeguarding features 67 elements. It identifies elements of living heritage whose survival is threatened and enables States Parties to the Convention to mobilize the necessary international cooperation and assistance to strengthen the transmission of these cultural practices in agreement with the communities concerned.

The Register of Good Safeguarding Practices currently includes 25 projects. It identifies programmes, projects and activities that best reflect the principles and objectives of the Convention.

Browse the lists: https://ich.unesco.org/en/lists

Media contacts:
Audrey Azoulay, UNESCO Director-General, names Lazare Eloundou Assomo Director of the World Heritage Centre.

About the World Heritage Centre

Created in 1992, the Centre coordinates all actions related to World Heritage within UNESCO. It is responsible for the day-to-day management of the Convention (adopted in 1972, 50 years next year), for organizing the annual sessions of the World Heritage Committee and its Bureau, and it advises States Parties on the preparation of their nominations. The Centre coordinates the process of reporting on the state of conservation of sites and urgent actions required when a site is under threat. It also organizes international assistance from the World Heritage Fund upon request. Finally, the World Heritage Centre is in charge of public information about World Heritage and, in this capacity, develops educational material to raise awareness of heritage protection among young people.

New Director of the World Heritage Centre

Due to the retirement of Ms Mechtild Rössler from her post as Director of the Centre on 30 September 2021, UNESCO Director-General Audrey Azoulay launched a call for candidates (internal and external) to replace her. At the end of the process, she selected Lazare Eloundou Assomo. A Cameroonian with 26 years of professional experience, including 21 years working on World Heritage, Lazare Eloundou Assomo is a man of the field and an advocate for the protection of heritage with governments. He will take up his post as Director of the World Heritage Centre at the start of January 2022.

It should be noted that this will be the first time in the history of the World Heritage Centre that it will be directed by an African national. This is a strong symbol.

More about the new Director’s professional background

A graduate in architecture (Grenoble School of Architecture, France) and in urban planning (DEA Grenoble 1), Mr Eloundou Assomo began his career as an associate researcher at the Centre for Earthen Construction of the Grenoble School of Architecture in 1996. He was then in charge of implementing habitat projects in Africa, and then of the pedagogical coordination of the Africa 2009 conservation programme set up by UNESCO’s World Heritage Centre and ICCROM.

He joined UNESCO in 2003 in the Africa Unit of the World Heritage Centre, where he contributed to the creation of the African World Heritage Fund and the development of the World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP).

From 2008 to 2013, he was Head of the Africa Unit of World Heritage Centre. During this period he coordinated several restoration projects in Mozambique (World Heritage site Fortress), Uganda and Mali, as well as capacity building initiatives in the region. He is the author of the book African World Heritage: A Remarkable Diversity, co-authored with Ishanlosen Odiaua and published in 2012 by UNESCO.

In 2013, he joined the UNESCO office in Bamako and became its head in 2014. He then became UNESCO’s head representative in Mali. While the country was hit by a violent armed conflict, he was in charge of the protection of Mali’s cultural heritage. He successfully led the reconstruction of the Timbuktu mausoleums and the safeguarding of ancient manuscripts.

He returned to UNESCO Headquarters in Paris in 2016, initially as Deputy Director of the Heritage Division and of the World Heritage Centre. In 2018, he became Director of Culture and Emergencies, coordinating emergency conservation responses to heritage affected by conflicts and disasters and the restitution of cultural property under the 1970 Convention.
The report highlights that, to date, less than 3 percent of governments’ stimulus packages have been allocated to education. Much more funding will be needed for immediate learning recovery. The report also notes that while nearly every country in the world offered remote learning opportunities for students, the quality and reach of such initiatives differed – in most cases, they offered, at best, a rather partial substitute for in-person instruction. More than 200 million learners live in low- and lower middle-income countries that are unprepared to deploy remote learning during emergency school closures.

Reopening schools must remain a top and urgent priority globally to stem and reverse learning losses. Countries should put in place Learning Recovery Programs with the objective of assuring that students of this generation attain at least the same competencies of the previous generation. Programs must cover three key lines of action to recover learning: 1) consolidating the curriculum; 2) extending instructional time; and 3) improving the efficiency of learning.

In terms of improving the efficiency of learning, techniques like targeted instruction can help learning recovery, which means that teachers align instruction to the learning level of students, rather than an assumed starting point or curricular expectation. Targeted instruction will require addressing the learning data crisis by assessing students’ learning levels. It also necessitates additional support to teachers so that they are well-equipped to teach to the level of where children are, which is crucial to prevent losses from accumulating once children are back in school.
