Europe could face a gap of as much as 30 billion cubic metres (bcm) of natural gas during the key summer period for refilling its gas storage sites in 2023, the IEA said in new analysis published today, highlighting the need for urgent action by governments to reduce gas consumption amid the global energy crisis.

The new report – Never too early to prepare for next winter: Europe’s gas balance for 2023-2024 – shows that gas storage sites in the European Union are now 95% full – putting them 5% above the 5-year average fill level. But the report cautions that the cushion provided by current storage levels, as well as recent lower gas prices and unusually mild temperatures, should not lead to overly optimistic conclusions about the future.

The process of filling EU gas storage sites this year benefitted from key factors that may well not be repeated in 2023. These include Russian pipeline gas deliveries that, although they were cut sharply during 2022, were close to ‘normal’ levels for much of the first half of the year. Total pipeline supply from Russia to the EU in 2022 is likely to amount to around 60 bcm, but it is highly unlikely that Russia will deliver another 60 bcm of pipeline gas in 2023 – and Russian deliveries to Europe could halt completely.

On top of this, China’s lower liquefied natural gas (LNG) imports in the first ten months of this year have been a key enabler of higher LNG availability for Europe to compensate for the drop in gas deliveries from Russia. If China’s LNG imports recover next year to their 2021 levels, this would capture over 85% of the expected increase in global LNG supply. And global LNG supply is expected to increase by only 20 bcm in 2023, with about one-third of the growth coming from the United States. The expected rise in global LNG supply next year is about half the average increase during the 2016-2019 period and much less than the likely decline in Russian pipeline deliveries to the EU next year.

In the event of a full cessation of Russian pipeline gas supplies to the EU and a recovery of Chinese LNG imports to 2021 levels, the new IEA analysis shows that Europe could face a challenging supply-demand gap of 30 bcm during the key period for refilling gas storage in the summer of 2023. This gap could represent almost half the gas required to fill storage sites to 95% capacity by the start of the 2023-24 heating season.

“With the recent mild weather and lower gas prices, there is a danger of complacency creeping into the conversation around Europe’s gas supplies, but we are by no means out of the woods yet,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “When we look at the latest trends and likely developments in global and European gas markets, we see that Europe is set to face an even sterner challenge next winter. This is why governments need to be taking immediate action to speed up improvements in energy efficiency and accelerate the deployment of renewables and heat pumps – and other steps to structurally reduce gas demand. This is essential for Europe’s energy security, the wellbeing of its citizens and industries, and its clean energy transition. The IEA will continue to work closely with the European Commission and governments across Europe and beyond to help tackle these challenges.”

Following on from the IEA’s 10-Point Plan to Reduce the European Union’s Reliance on Russian Natural Gas that was published last March, the IEA will in due course present a plan to secure Europe's gas balance for next winter, showing the concrete policy actions needed to ensure storage sites are filled to 95% capacity by the beginning of the 2023-24 heating season and to structurally reduce gas consumption during the winter.
The global energy crisis triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is causing profound and long-lasting changes that have the potential to hasten the transition to a more sustainable and secure energy system, according to the latest edition of the IEA’s World Energy Outlook.

Today’s energy crisis is delivering a shock of unprecedented breadth and complexity. The biggest tremors have been felt in the markets for natural gas, coal and electricity – with significant turmoil in oil markets as well, necessitating two oil stock releases of unparalleled scale by IEA member countries to avoid even more severe disruptions. With unrelenting geopolitical and economic concerns, energy markets remain extremely vulnerable, and the crisis is a reminder of the fragility and unsustainability of the current global energy system, the World Energy Outlook 2022 (WEO) warns.

The WEO’s analysis finds scant evidence to support claims from some quarters that climate policies and net zero commitments contributed to the run-up in energy prices. In the most affected regions, higher shares of renewables were correlated with lower electricity prices – and more efficient homes and electrified heat have provided an important buffer for some consumers, albeit far from enough. The heaviest burden is falling on poorer households where a larger share of income is spent on energy.

Alongside short-term measures to try to shield consumers from the impacts of the crisis, many governments are now taking longer-term steps. Some are seeking to increase or diversify oil and gas supplies, and many are looking to accelerate structural changes. The most notable responses include the US Inflation Reduction Act, the EU’s Fit for 55 package and REPowerEU, Japan’s Green Transformation (GX) programme, Korea’s aim to increase the share of nuclear and renewables in its energy mix, and ambitious clean energy targets in China and India.

In the WEO’s Stated Policies Scenario, which is based on the latest policy settings worldwide, these new measures help propel global clean energy investment to more than USD 2 trillion a year by 2030, a rise of more than 50% from today. As markets rebalance in this scenario, the upside for coal from today’s crisis is temporary as renewables, supported by nuclear power, see sustained gains. As a result, a high point for global emissions is reached in 2025. At the same time, international energy markets undergo a profound reorientation in the 2020s as countries adjust to the rupture of Russia-Europe flows.

“Energy markets and policies have changed as a result of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, not just for the time being, but for decades to come,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “Even with today’s policy settings, the energy world is shifting dramatically before our eyes. Government responses around the world promise to make this a historic and definitive turning point towards a cleaner, more affordable and more secure energy system.”

For the first time ever, a WEO scenario based on today’s prevailing policy settings – in this case, the Stated Policies Scenario – has global demand for every fossil fuel exhibiting a peak or plateau. In this scenario, coal use falls back within the next few years, natural gas demand reaches a plateau by the end of the decade, and rising sales of electric vehicles (EVs) mean that oil demand levels off in the mid-2030s before ebbing slightly to mid-century. This means that total demand for fossil fuels declines steadily from the mid-2020s to 2050 by an annual average roughly equivalent to the lifetime output of a large oil field. The declines are much faster and more pronounced in the WEO’s more climate-focused scenarios.

Global fossil fuel use has grown alongside GDP since the start of the Industrial Revolution in the 18th century: putting this rise into reverse will be a pivotal moment in energy history. The share of fossil fuels in the global energy mix in the Stated Policies Scenario falls from around 80% to just above 60% by 2050. Global CO2 emissions fall back slowly from a high point of 37 billion tonnes per year to 32 billion tonnes by 2050. This would be associated with a rise of around 2.5 °C in global average temperatures by 2100, far from enough to avoid severe climate change impacts. Full achievement of all climate pledges would move the world towards safer ground, but there is still a large gap between today’s pledges and a stabilisation of the rise in global temperatures around 1.5 °C.

Today’s growth rates for deployment of solar PV, wind, EVs and batteries, if maintained, would lead to a much faster transformation than projected in the Stated Policies Scenario, although this would require supportive policies not just in the early leading markets for these technologies but across the world. Supply chains for some key technologies – including batteries, solar PV and electrolysers – are expanding at rates that support greater global ambition. If all announced manufacturing expansion plans for solar PV see the light of day, manufacturing capacity would exceed the deployment levels in the Announced Pledges Scenario in 2030 by around 75%. In the case of electrolysers for hydrogen production, the potential excess of capacity of all announced projects is around 50%.

Stronger policies will be essential to drive the huge increase in energy investment that is needed to reduce the risks of future price spikes and volatility, according to this year’s WEO. Subdued investment due to lower prices in the 2015-2020 period made the energy sector much more vulnerable to the sort of disruptions we have seen in 2022. While clean energy investment rises above USD 2 trillion by 2030 in the States Policies Scenario, it would need to be above USD 4 trillion by the same date in the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario, highlighting the need to attract new investors to the energy sector. And major international efforts are still urgently required to narrow the worrying divide in clean energy investment levels between advanced economies and emerging and developing economies.

“The environmental case for clean energy needed no reinforcement, but the economic arguments in favour of cost-competitive and affordable clean technologies are now stronger – and so too is the energy security case. Today’s alignment of economic, climate and security priorities has already started to move the dial towards a better outcome for the world’s people and for the planet,” Dr Birol said.

“It is essential to bring everyone on board, especially at a time when geopolitical fractures on energy and climate are all the more visible,” he said. “This means redoubling efforts to ensure that a broad coalition of countries has a stake in the new energy economy. The journey to a more secure and sustainable energy system may not be a smooth one. But today’s crisis makes it crystal clear why we need to press ahead.”

Russia has been by far the world’s largest exporter of fossil fuels, but its invasion of Ukraine is prompting a wholesale reorientation of global energy trade, leaving it with a much-diminished position. All Russia’s trade ties with Europe based on fossil fuels had ultimately been undercut in previous WEO scenarios by Europe’s net zero ambitions, but Russia’s ability to deliver at relatively low cost meant that it lost ground only gradually. Now the rupture has come with a speed that few imagined possible. Russian fossil fuel exports never return – in any of the scenarios in this year’s WEO – to the levels seen in 2021, with Russia’s reorientation to Asian markets particularly challenging in the case of natural gas. Russia’s share of internationally traded energy, which stood at close to 20% in 2021, falls to 13% in 2030 the Stated Policies Scenario, while the shares of both the United States and the Middle East rise.

For gas consumers, the upcoming Northern Hemisphere winter promises to be a perilous moment and a testing time for EU solidarity – and the winter of 2023-24 could be even tougher. But in the longer term, one of the effects of Russia’s recent actions is that the era of rapid growth in gas demand draws to a close. In the Stated Policies Scenario, the scenario that sees the highest gas use, global demand rises by less than 5% between 2021 and 2030 and then remains flat through to 2050. Momentum behind gas in developing economies has slowed, notably in South and Southeast Asia, putting a dent in the credentials of gas as a transition fuel.

“Amid the major changes taking place, a new energy security paradigm is needed to ensure reliability and affordability while reducing emissions,” Dr Birol said. “That is why this year’s WEO provides 10 principles that can help guide policymakers through the period when declining fossil fuel and expanding clean energy systems co-exist, since both systems are required to function well during energy transitions in order to deliver the energy services needed by consumers. And as the world moves on from today’s energy crisis, it needs to avoid new vulnerabilities arising from high and volatile critical mineral prices or highly concentrated clean energy supply chains”
Small and medium-sized businesses are highly exposed to today’s high energy prices, and the International Energy Agency and the European Commission today held a high-level event to raise awareness of what governments, businesses and related stakeholders can do to empower and protect these backbones of the European economy.



At the online event, which was led by IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol and European Commissioner for Energy Kadri Simson, the Commission presented support measures that are already available, as well as guidelines and suggestions for what national governments can do. The IEA presented a series of steps companies can take themselves to become more energy efficient and resilient to weather the current energy crisis.



“Today’s global energy crisis sparked by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has dramatically driven up the cost of energy, which is hurting consumers and businesses and putting entire economies at risk,” said Dr Birol. “Small businesses are among the most exposed, and given their key role throughout the economy, they need to be supported in this crisis. That’s why we have teamed up with the European Commission to highlight the practical actions that can be taken, focused around improvements in energy efficiency, to help small businesses become more resilient in the face of this unprecedented crisis.”

“Small and medium sized companies represent 99% of all businesses in the EU. They employ over 80 million people, account for more than half of Europe’s GDP and play a key role in every sector of the economy. If they are not thriving, neither is the European economy – nor European people,” said Commissioner Simson. “Since October last year, the Commission has brought forward a number of initiatives to support those who struggle to pay their energy bills. One of the most effective ways to support SMEs in mitigating energy costs and supply risks is by helping them to reduce energy consumption, both in the short and longer term. If we all join forces – national, regional and local governments, financial institutions, employee and employer organisations, and energy agencies, we can support SMEs in these difficult times.”

Recognising the importance of energy efficiency for small businesses, the advice presented today by the IEA sets out actions that have been proven to save energy, including greater use of smart meters and controls, getting workforces more involved in identifying efficiency opportunities, better maintenance of equipment, and upgrading to more efficient motors, compressors, heating and lighting.



At today’s event, after the IEA’s Head of Energy Efficiency Brian Motherway presented the energy challenges facing SMEs, Dr Birol and Commissioner Simson gave keynote addresses. This was followed by a panel discussion involving Leonore Gewessler, Austria’s Minister of Climate Action, Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation and Technology; Véronique Willems, Secretary General of SMEunited, the association of crafts and SMEs in Europe; Plamen Dimitrov, President of Bulgaria’s Confederation of Independent Trade Unions; and Seamus Hoyne, Secretary General of FEDARENE, a network of regional and local agencies across Europe that implement energy policies.
Despite concerns about the effects of the current energy crisis, global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from fossil fuel combustion are expected to grow by just under 1% this year, only a small fraction of their increase last year, as a strong expansion of renewables and electric vehicles prevents a much sharper rise.

New IEA analysis of the latest data from around the world shows that these CO2 emissions are on course to increase by close to 300 million tonnes in 2022 to 33.8 billion tonnes – a far smaller rise than their jump of nearly 2 billion tonnes in 2021, which resulted from the rapid global recovery from the economic crisis triggered by the pandemic. This year’s increase is driven by power generation and by the aviation sector, as air travel rebounds from pandemic lows.

The rise in global CO2 emissions this year would be much larger – more than tripling to reach close to 1 billion tonnes – were it not for the major deployments of renewable energy technologies and electric vehicles (EVs) around the world. Even though the energy crisis sparked by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has propped up global coal demand in 2022 by making natural gas far more expensive, the relatively small increase in coal emissions has been considerably outweighed by the expansion of renewables. Global energy trends have also been affected this year by the impacts of Russia’s war on the world economy, which have significantly dampened expectations for economic growth, notably in Europe.

The combined result is that the CO2 intensity of the world’s energy supply is set to improve slightly in 2022, resuming a years-long trend of consistent improvement that was disrupted last year by the emissions-intensive economic recovery from the Covid crisis. This year’s expected improvement contrasts with what happened following the 2008 global financial crisis, which saw strong deteriorations in the CO2 intensity of energy supply for several years after the initial economic shock.

“The global energy crisis triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has prompted a scramble by many countries to use other energy sources to replace the natural gas supplies that Russia has withheld from the market. The encouraging news is that solar and wind are filling much of the gap, with the uptick in coal appearing to be relatively small and temporary,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “This means that CO2 emissions are growing far less quickly this year than some people feared – and that policy actions by governments are driving real structural changes in the energy economy. Those changes are set to accelerate thanks to the major clean energy policy plans that have advanced around the world in recent months.”

Solar PV and wind are leading an increase in global renewable electricity generation in 2022 of more than 700 terawatt-hours (TWh), the largest annual rise on record. Without this increase, global CO2 emissions would be more than 600 million tonnes higher this year. The rapid deployment of solar and wind is on course to account for two-thirds of the growth in renewable power generation. Despite the challenging situation that hydropower has faced in several regions due to droughts this year, global hydropower output is up year-on-year, contributing over one-fifth of the expected growth in renewable power.

While electricity generation from both wind and solar PV is growing far more than any other source in 2022, coal is expected to post the next largest increase as some countries revert to coal use in response to soaring natural gas prices. In total, global CO2 emissions from coal-fired power generation are set to grow by more than 200 million tonnes, or 2%, this year, led by increases in Asia.

The European Union’s CO2 emissions are on course to decline this year despite an increase in coal emissions. The rise in European coal use is expected to be temporary, with a strong pipeline of new renewable projects forecast to add around 50 gigawatts of capacity in 2023. These additions would generate more electricity than the expected increase in coal-fired power generation in the EU in 2022. In China, CO2 emissions are set to remain broadly flat this year, reflecting the mixture of different forces at work, including weaker economic growth, the impacts of drought on hydropower, and major deployments of solar and wind.

As well as the challenges for hydropower in some regions, the world’s low-emissions electricity supply has suffered a setback from a series of nuclear power plant outages, which are set to reduce global nuclear power production by over 80 TWh. This has largely been due to more than half of France’s fleet of nuclear reactors being offline for part of the year. The drop in nuclear power generation globally has contributed to an increased use of coal and oil for electricity generation. The world’s use of natural gas is expected to decline following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, resulting in a decrease in CO2 emissions of around 40 million tonnes in 2022.

Demand for oil is set to grow more than for any other fossil fuel in 2022, with oil-related CO2 emissions up by around 180 million tonnes. This has been driven largely by the transport sector as travel restrictions have been lifted and pre-pandemic commuting and travel patterns have resumed. Aviation is expected to contribute around three-quarters of the rise in emissions from oil use, notably due to increases in international air travel. However, the aviation sector’s emissions are still only around 80% of their pre-pandemic levels.

Uncertainty in global natural gas markets will continue to shape many key energy trends for the rest of this year and in 2023. However, promising signs of lasting structural changes to the CO2 intensity of global energy are evident in 2022 – and they are set to be reinforced by major increases in government support for clean energy investment, notably in the US Inflation Reduction Act, as well as in decarbonisation plans such as the European Union’s Fit for 55 package and Japan’s Green Transformation (GX) plan, and in ambitious clean energy targets in China and India.

The effects of recent policies on energy security and global emissions trends will be explored in depth by the IEA’s World Energy Outlook 2022, which will be released on 27 October.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol today received the prestigious GLOBSEC European Award for his and the Agency’s work to support Europe this year during the global energy crisis triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

The European Award is presented each year by GLOBSEC, a global think tank based in Bratislava, the Slovak capital, to honour unwavering dedication to strengthening Europe and promoting growth and progress. GLOBSEC said Dr Birol had been chosen this year because from the beginning of Russia’s invasion, the IEA under his leadership has been a key player in efforts to mitigate the world’s “first truly global energy crisis”.

Slovak Prime Minister Eduard Heger presented the award to Dr Birol at GLOBSEC’s Tatra Summit in Slovakia in the presence of Ministers from Central and Eastern European countries.
Energy infrastructure in the greater Horn of Africa has struggled to keep pace with a fast-growing population, creating a formidable hurdle for the region’s buoyant economies that can best be overcome through stronger deployment of energy efficiency and renewable technologies, according to a new IEA report.

Countries in the region have already demonstrated they can find innovative solutions to extend electricity access to underserved populations and have huge underexploited potential for wind and solar power. But achieving these objectives requires supportive policies, better regulatory frameworks, regional cooperation and international financial assistance, according to the IEA’s new report on Clean Energy Transitions in the greater Horn of Africa, which is being presented today at a conference in Kampala, Uganda.

Energy consumption in the greater Horn of Africa – defined in the report as Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan and Uganda – has grown by 3% per year over the last decade, but half the population still lacks access to electricity and only one in six people cooks with modern fuels. The eight countries represent nearly a quarter of sub-Saharan Africa’s GDP, yet their total energy consumption is less than that of Belgium and the Netherlands combined – but with 10 times the population.

“The greater Horn of Africa is home to some of the world’s fastest growing economies, but its potential is at risk if energy infrastructure can’t keep pace,” said Mary Burce Warlick, the IEA Deputy Executive Director. “The IEA stands ready to provide expertise and policy advice for African countries to develop clean, reliable and affordable energy systems that will serve all their people. These efforts will hinge on regional cooperation and international assistance.”

Ms Warlick is providing the keynote remarks at the Kampala conference along with Ugandan Minister of Energy and Mineral Development Ruth Nankabirwa and Netherlands Vice Minister for International Cooperation Kitty Van Der Heijden. All eight regional countries have sent representatives from their energy ministries, and other regional stakeholders are attending as well.

Despite being one of the regions globally that is most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, the greater Horn of Africa has one of the lowest levels of emissions per capita. In 2020, the region emitted about the same amount of carbon dioxide as New York City.

Bioenergy – often in the form of gathered firewood, charcoal and agricultural waste – currently meets around 80% of the greater Horn of Africa’s energy demand. For electricity, the region has one of the world’s most sustainable systems, with more than 85% of generation coming from renewables – mostly in the form of large hydropower projects in Ethiopia, Sudan and Kenya. But the region has massive, underutilised potential for solar, wind and geothermal power.

Many of the region’s smaller countries, historically dependent on energy imports, are installing their first large-scale renewables projects, such as the Juba solar PV farm in South Sudan or the Ghoubet Wind farm in Djibouti.



Today, 140 million people in the greater Horn of Africa lack access to electricity – more than the population of Mexico. The situation has improved since 2010, with an average of 8 million people gaining access each year. Kenya and Ethiopia lead the way, often thanks to innovative off-grid solutions: the two countries together accounted for 30% of solar home systems and solar appliance sales worldwide in 2021. Along with Uganda, they are also front-runners for mini-grid expansion. Somalia, a country without a national grid, has developed an active off-grid market, and Eritrea has reached near universal access in cities. However, progress in some countries has stagnated since the Covid-19 pandemic began, and the region now faces higher fuel import bills because of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

Besides accelerating the rollout of renewables, the report says the greater Horn’s energy security and access would also benefit from improving the efficiency of buildings, cooking, cooling and appliances, as well as greater adaptation of electric two- and three-wheelers.

The region needs to improve the investment environment and create a pipeline of bankable projects to attract the outside investment necessary to achieve universal energy access and support economic development. Cumbersome bureaucracy, a lack of clear planning and limited technical expertise all contribute to the level of risk perceived by investors. Attracting more energy investment requires better leveraging of limited concessional public financing. New sources of finance specific to clean energy can help. These include climate finance, carbon credits, renewable energy certificates, and sustainable or diaspora bonds, which would also help develop local capital markets.
Russia’s continued curtailment of natural gas flows to Europe has pushed international prices to painful new highs, disrupted trade flows and led to acute fuel shortages in some emerging and developing economies, with the market tightness expected to continue well into 2023, according to the IEA’s latest quarterly Gas Market Report.



Natural gas markets worldwide have been tightening since 2021, and global gas consumption is expected to decline by 0.8% in 2022 as result of a record 10% contraction in Europe and unchanged demand in the Asia Pacific region. Global gas consumption is forecast to grow by only 0.4% next year, but the outlook is subject to a high level of uncertainty, particularly in terms of Russia’s future actions and the economic impacts of sustained high energy prices.



Russia has largely cut off gas supplies to Europe in retaliation against sanctions imposed on it following its invasion of Ukraine. This has deepened market tensions and uncertainty ahead of the coming winter, not just for Europe but also for all markets that rely on the same supply pool of liquefied natural gas (LNG).



“Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and sharp reductions in natural gas supplies to Europe are causing significant harm to consumers, businesses and entire economies – not just in Europe but also in emerging and developing economies,” said Keisuke Sadamori, the IEA’s Director of Energy Markets and Security. “The outlook for gas markets remains clouded, not least because of Russia’s reckless and unpredictable conduct, which has shattered its reputation as a reliable supplier. But all the signs point to markets remaining very tight well into 2023.”



The current gas crisis also casts longer-term uncertainty on the prospects for natural gas, especially in developing markets where its use was expected to rise at least in the medium term as it replaced other higher-emission fossil fuels.

European natural gas prices and Asian spot LNG prices spiked to record highs in the third quarter of 2022. This reduced gas demand and incentivised switching to other fuels such as coal and oil for power generation. In some emerging and developing economies, the price spikes triggered shortages and power cuts. Europe’s gas consumption declined by more than 10% in the first eight months of this year compared with the same period in 2021, driven by a 15% drop in the industrial sector as factories curtailed production.

Natural gas demand in China and Japan was almost unchanged in that same period, while it contracted in India and Korea. Chinese gas demand is forecast to increase by less than 2% this year, its lowest annual growth rate since the early 1990s. Meanwhile, natural gas prices in the United States hit their highest summer levels since 2008, yet North America was one of the few regions of the world where demand increased, supported by demand from power generation.



Europe has offset the sharp falls in Russian gas supplies through LNG imports, as well as alternative pipeline supplies from Norway and elsewhere. Europe’s surging demand for LNG – up 65% in the first eight months of 2022 from a year earlier – has drawn supply away from traditional buyers in the Asia-Pacific region, where demand dropped by 7% in the same period as a result of high prices, mild weather and continued Covid lockdowns in China.



The IEA forecasts that Europe’s LNG imports will increase by over 60 billion cubic metres (bcm) this year, or more than double the amount of global LNG export capacity additions, keeping international LNG trade under strong pressure for the short- to medium-term. This implies that Asia’s LNG imports will remain lower than last year for the rest of 2022. However, China’s LNG imports could rise next year under a series of new contracts concluded since the beginning of 2021, while a colder-than-average winter would also result in additional demand from northeast Asia, further adding to market tightness.



In addition to diversifying supply, the European Union and its member states have taken other steps to increase gas security, such as setting minimum storage obligations and implementing energy saving measures for the coming winter. EU storage facilities were close to 90% full as of end of September, though the absence of Russian supply presents challenges for refilling them next year. Both Japan and Korea have instituted policies to reduce reliance on imported LNG for power generation and have developed contingency plans for possible LNG supply disruptions.



For the new report, the IEA conducted a resilience analysis of the EU’s gas market in the case of a complete Russian supply shutdown starting from 1 November 2022. The analysis shows that without demand reductions in place and if Russian pipeline supply is completely cut, EU gas storage would be less than 20% full in February, assuming a high level of LNG supply – and close to 5% full, assuming low LNG supply. Storage falling to these levels would increase the risk of supply disruptions in the event of a late cold spell. A reduction in EU gas demand through the winter period of 9% from the average level of the past five years would be necessary to maintain gas storage levels above 25% in the case of lower LNG inflows. And a reduction in demand of 13% from the 5-year average would be necessary through the winter period to sustain storage levels above 33% in the case of low LNG inflows. Therefore, gas saving measures will be crucial to minimise storage withdrawals and keep inventories at adequate levels until the end of the heating season.
The International Energy Agency and several partners today launched a new tool to track financing costs for energy projects around the world with the aim of identifying and addressing risks that have impeded vital investment flows to emerging and developing economies.



The Cost of Capital Observatory was developed by the IEA together with the World Economic Forum, ETH Zurich and Imperial College London. It will be hosted on the IEA’s website and regularly updated with new data, analysis and features. The IEA website will also host an interactive Cost of Capital Dashboard to dig into data for selected countries.



Despite having two-thirds of the global population, emerging and developing economies, excluding China, account for less than one-fifth of global investment in clean energy. One of the key barriers is a high cost of capital, reflecting some real and perceived risks about investment in these economies. Bringing down the cost of capital is a critical lever to attract funds, especially private capital, and policy makers use this information to ensure that investments are remunerated in a fair manner, especially when it comes to sectors or projects that need any kind of government support.



However, there is a lack of transparency about the cost of capital, making it harder for investors to price risk and for policy makers to act. The new Observatory has been established to fill this gap.



“A high cost of capital is a roadblock for investors, and the data provided by our Observatory is essential to understand how this roadblock can be dismantled,’’ said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “This will allow more capital to flow to clean energy, where it is urgently needed to tackle today’s energy crisis and reach sustainable development goals.”

Bringing down the cost of capital would make a huge difference to the overall costs of energy transitions. According to new IEA estimates, reducing financing costs by 2 percentage points would bring down the investment needed to reach net zero emissions in emerging and developing economies by a cumulative USD 16 trillion over the period to 2050.



The IEA estimates that global clean energy investment will increase by more than 10% in 2022 to reach a total of USD 1.4 trillion, but this is due almost entirely to advanced economies and China. Meanwhile, despite some bright spots, clean energy spending in emerging and developing economies outside China remains at 2015 levels. Many countries find themselves in a trap, with underdeveloped financial markets deterring investment, and a lack of projects preventing the establishment of reliable pricing benchmarks.

IEA analysis, based on surveys of investors and experts in different countries, has shown that the cost of capital for a utility-scale solar PV plant in 2021 was between two and three times higher in key emerging economies than in advanced economies and China. As a result, financing costs accounted for around half of total levelized costs of a solar PV plant, notably higher than the 25% to 30% seen in advanced economies and China.
The accelerated rollout of clean energy technologies needed to reach climate goals depends on building up a skilled workforce – and studying different labour training programmes around the world can provide valuable insights for countries and communities undertaking their own clean energy transitions, according to a new report by the International Energy Agency.



The report is being launched at the Global Clean Energy Action Forum (GCEAF) in Pittsburgh, USA to inform discussions and advance the work of the Clean Energy Ministerial’s (CEM) Empowering People Initiative: Skills and Inclusivity for a Just Clean Energy Transition.



The report reviews more than 150 case studies from over 50 countries, illustrating how best to overcome a broad range of challenges and create successful employment policies. The analysed schemes cover the reskilling of coal workers; the retraining of workers in the oil and gas sector and the auto industry; academic and corporate programmes; and targeted skills programmes for youth, women and marginalised communities.

Among the lessons learned from successful programmes is the importance of comprehensive workforce mapping to foresee what type of skills and workers will be needed and where, as well as the need for collaborative approaches between government, industry and workers. In some cases, community-based efforts are effective if they are designed to leverage distinct local circumstances while in other cases more widespread training is needed for specific functions in clean energy sectors such as hydrogen and energy efficiency.

As highlighted by the recent IEA World Energy Employment report, clean energy already accounts for half of global energy employment, a share that will continue to grow rapidly as clean energy transitions accelerate worldwide. Energy is a major contributor to jobs globally, accounting for about 2% of the world’s workforce, with much higher percentages in many regions. As increased deployment of clean energy technologies further boosts job creation, both current and future workers will need to be equipped with the requisite expertise to maximise benefits from this growth and to avoid bottlenecks caused by skills and labour shortages.

In many cases, it will be necessary to develop completely new programmes for education, certification and vocational training, the new skills report finds. In other cases, upskilling or reskilling of the existing workforce will be essential. Targeted programmes are needed to ensure that the new energy workforce is more inclusive than the energy sector of today, which lags the rest of the economy in female employment.



“A critical component of people-centred energy transitions will be to create new high-quality jobs while at the same time reskilling and training the world’s existing energy workforce,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol, who is launching the report today at the GCEAF in Pittsburgh. “This collaborative report by the IEA and the CEM’s Empowering People Initiative advances our work on people-centred transitions by offering real-world examples and lessons from programmes around the world that seek to prepare workers to meet the energy workforce demands of tomorrow. I am especially grateful to the co-leads of the Empowering People Initiative – Canada, the United States and the European Commission – for supporting this important work.”



“No two energy systems are the same; therefore, clean energy transitions will occur in a variety of contexts with a range of challenges. No matter where they occur, it is imperative that these transitions leave no one behind. That is why we must learn and engage with as many people as possible to holistically manage transitions effectively,” said US Secretary of Energy Jennifer M. Granholm. “This report is an important step in that learning process.”

“The IEA report highlights that workforce skills mapping is crucial to help us target which skills and qualifications are going to be most in demand in the years to come. Armed with this information, policy-makers, companies and educators can join forces and help workers make the leap from jobs in traditional, fossil fuel-based industries to emerging sectors where we are facing skills shortages,” said European Commissioner for Jobs and Social Rights Nicolas Schmit. “With next year designated the European Year of Skills, I am positive that we can make a big impact.”

“The transition to net zero represents a generational opportunity for the world’s workers. Governments must work directly with labour organisations and businesses to ensure that workers are provided with the opportunities to prosper in the net zero economy,” said Canada’s Minister of Natural Resources Jonathan Wilkinson. “Canada is working actively on this, at home and with international partners like the IEA.”
Despite encouraging signs of progress across a number of sectors, stronger efforts are needed to bring the world on track to reach net zero emissions by mid-century, according to the IEA’s latest appraisal of global progress on clean energy technologies.



The annual Tracking Clean Energy Progress (TCEP) update assesses 55 components of the energy system – sectors, technologies, infrastructures and cross-cutting CO2 mitigation strategies – and evaluates their progress in 2021 towards reaching key medium-term milestones by the end of this decade that are set out in the IEA’s pathway to Net Zero Emissions by 2050. The TCEP analysis is available as a comprehensive online resource on the IEA’s website.



Recent technology developments and policy actions suggest momentum is accelerating in some important regions and sectors. Initial estimates point to 2022 being a record year for renewable electricity capacity additions, with an increase of about 340 gigawatts, roughly equal to the entire installed power capacity of Japan. China accounts for about half of those additions. This year is also expected to see another all-time high for electric vehicle sales, lifting them to 13% of total light duty vehicle sales globally. The pipelines for both hydrogen projects and carbon capture and storage facilities continue to expand, and last year saw record sales of heat pumps. A pilot project last year used hydrogen to produce fully fossil-free steel, and the first commercial production of sodium-ion batteries without lithium is set to start next year.



“There are more signs than ever that the new global energy economy is advancing strongly,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “This reaffirms my belief that today’s global energy crisis can be a turning point towards a cleaner, more affordable and more secure energy system. But this new IEA analysis shows the need for greater and sustained efforts across a range of technologies and sectors to ensure the world can meet its energy and climate goals.”

On the policy front, the United States’ historic Inflation Reduction Act – enacted in August – provides USD 370 billion in energy security and climate change investments, giving a boost to a huge array of clean energy technologies, from solar, wind and electric vehicles to carbon capture and hydrogen. Meanwhile, with its REPowerEU plan, the European Union is raising its renewables and energy efficiency targets and putting significant resources behind achieving them.



Governments are also spending more on clean energy research and development, which could reach USD 35 billion in 2022, while venture capital investments in clean energy start-ups reached an all-time high in 2021. Governments are supporting major R&D and demonstration projects through measures such as the US Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the EU Innovation Fund, Japan’s Green Innovation Fund and China’s 14th Five-Year Plan, with an increasing focus on heavy industry, hydrogen, and carbon capture.



Despite these positive signs, this year’s TCEP, which evaluates the state-of-play in 2021, found that only two components – electric vehicles and lighting – were fully on track for their 2030 milestones in the IEA’s Net Zero by 2050 Scenario, the same two as the previous year. EV sales doubled worldwide last year to account for almost 9% of the car market, while over 50% of the global lighting market now uses LED technology. Of the remaining tracking areas, 30 were rated as “more efforts needed” and 23 were “not on track”. Areas not on track include improving the energy efficiency of building designs, developing clean and efficient district heating, phasing out coal-fired power generation, eliminating methane flaring, shifting aviation and shipping to cleaner fuels, and making cement, chemical and steel production cleaner.



Along with TCEP, the IEA is also releasing an expanded clean energy innovation tracker, which includes an update of the Clean Technology Guide, as well as a new publicly available global database of clean energy demonstration projects that provides project-by-project information including location, sector, technology, technology readiness, status, funding and timeline of operations. The database responds to the need to monitor how public and private support for demonstration projects translates into projects on the ground.

Clean energy transitions will require a diversity of technologies and fuels across all parts of the energy system, calling for comprehensive and ambitious policy packages that adequately support transitions in all sectors, the TCEP analysis shows. This current decade is a critical time for laying a strong foundation for achieving longer-term goals.
Momentum continues to build behind low-emissions hydrogen amid the global energy crisis, with electrolyser manufacturing expected to grow strongly and pilot projects proliferating in new applications such as steel and transport, a new IEA report says today. But these areas remain a small part of the overall hydrogen landscape, highlighting the need for greater policy support.

The encouraging developments in hydrogen technologies that can support the clean energy transition include an expected sixfold increase by 2025 in global manufacturing capacity of electrolysers, which are needed to produce low-emissions hydrogen from renewable electricity. Low-emissions hydrogen production worldwide in 2021 was less than 1 million tonnes – with practically all of it coming from plants using fossil fuels with carbon capture, utilisation and storage – according to the latest edition of the IEA’s annual Global Hydrogen Review.

Meanwhile, overall hydrogen demand worldwide reached 94 million tonnes in 2021, exceeding the previous annual high of 91 million tonnes reached in 2019. Almost all of the increase last year was met by hydrogen produced from fossil fuels without carbon capture. And while demand for new applications of hydrogen jumped by 60% in 2021, the growth was from such a low base that it rose to just 40,000 tons.

Hydrogen and hydrogen-derived fuels can contribute to both climate ambitions and energy security if they are produced cleanly and deployed wisely in sectors such as heavy industry and long-distance transport where they can cut emissions and replace fossil fuels. With the global energy crisis boosting interest in low-emissions hydrogen, the pipeline of projects keeps expanding, though only a small share of the projects are under construction. The Global Hydrogen Review lays out a series of policy recommendations to build the frameworks and create the demand needed to encourage investment in low-emissions hydrogen, including in the electrolysers and carbon capture technologies needed to produce it.

“There are growing signs that hydrogen will be an important element of the transition to an affordable, secure and clean energy system, but there are still major advances in technology, regulation and demand needed for it to fulfil its potential,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “The strong flow of announcements we now see for low-emissions hydrogen projects are yet another indicator that a new energy economy is emerging. Governments now need to implement concrete policies to remove regulatory barriers and support shovel-ready projects.”

Taking into account today’s policy settings by governments, the new report estimates that global hydrogen demand is set to reach 115 million tonnes by 2030. If governments fully deliver on their current climate pledges, that number could rise to 130 million tonnes, with more than a quarter of it being met by low-emissions hydrogen. A similar amount of global hydrogen demand would be for new applications in that scenario.

Some new applications for hydrogen are showing particular signs of progress today. Announcements of new steel projects are growing fast just one year after the first pilot plant for using pure hydrogen in direct reduction of iron started production. The first fleet of trains running on hydrogen fuel cells started operating in Germany, and there are also more than 100 pilot projects for using hydrogen and derivatives in shipping. In the power sector, announced projects using hydrogen and ammonia stack up to almost 3.5 gigawatts of potential capacity by 2030.

If all projects currently in the pipeline come to fruition, the production of low-emissions hydrogen could reach 16 million to 24 million tonnes per year by 2030, with more than half of it coming from electrolysers running on renewable energy. Completion of all the projects in the pipeline could result in the world’s capacity to produce hydrogen via electrolysers rising to up to 290 gigawatts in 2030 compared with 0.5 gigawatts in 2021. The report suggests that based on today’s prices, renewable hydrogen could already compete with hydrogen from fossil fuels in regions that have good renewable resources and that currently rely on imported fossil fuels for hydrogen production.

Today, global capacity to manufacture electrolysers stands at 8 gigawatts a year, but based on industry announcements it could exceed 60 gigawatts a year by 2030. And if electrolyser projects in the pipeline are completed and the planned scaling up in manufacturing capacities takes place, costs could fall by around 70% by 2030 compared with today.

The report suggests several steps for governments to reduce risk and improve the economic feasibility of low-emissions hydrogen. They can create demand through auctions, mandates, quotas and requirements in public procurement, and they can ensure that gas pipelines, terminals and other infrastructure are built to be compatible with hydrogen and ammonia. Establishing international markets in hydrogen requires cooperation to develop common standards, regulations and certifications.
Against the backdrop of the energy crisis and the threat of a global food crisis, expert authors urge leaders at COP27 to follow through on actions that would accelerate progress towards net zero emissions by decades, cut energy costs and boost food security for billions of people worldwide

The inaugural report highlights growing momentum across key sectors, including a doubling of electric vehicles (EVs) sales in 2021 and a forecast 8% increase in global renewable capacity in 2022

At COP26, 45 countries committed to make clean technologies the most affordable, accessible and attractive option in each major greenhouse gas emitting sector by 2030 under the ‘Breakthrough Agenda’

Ahead of the US-hosted Global Clean Energy Action Forum, this is the first assessment of priorities for strengthened collaborative action and progress so far, produced by the International Energy Agency (IEA), International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and the UN Climate Change High-Level Champions

The Breakthrough Agenda Report sets out 25 collaborative actions to help make clean power, EVs, low-carbon steel and hydrogen, and sustainable farming the most affordable options as soon as possible

The first annual Breakthrough Agenda Report, requested by 45 world leaders, delivers a progress report on the actions needed to deliver on the historic clean technology commitment by governments representing two-thirds of the global economy. The Breakthrough Agenda, as the commitment is known, aims to align countries’ actions and coordinate investment to scale up deployment and drive down costs across five key sectors including – power, road transport, steel, hydrogen and agriculture.

Together, these sectors account for nearly 60% of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions today and could deliver the bulk of the emission reductions needed by 2030 in a pathway that would make a significant contribution to limiting global warming to a maximum of 1.5°C, in line with the Paris Agreement goals.

The report notes an increase in practical international cooperation in recent years, and progress in deploying the technologies needed, including:

A doubling of EVs sales in 2021 from the previous year, to a new record of 6.6 million

A forecast increase in global renewable capacity of 8% in 2022 – pushing through the 300GW mark for the first time and equivalent to powering approximately 225 million homes

Forecast global electricity generation cost reduction of at least USD 55 billion in 2022, based on new renewable capacity added in 2021

However, the report also warns that far greater international cooperation is needed to get the world on track to meet its climate commitments.

“We are in the midst of the first truly global energy crisis, with devastating knock-on consequences across the world economy, especially in developing countries. Only by speeding up the transition to clean sustainable energy can we achieve lasting energy security,’’ said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “Through international collaboration, we can make the transition quicker, cheaper and easier for everyone – on the back of faster innovation, greater economies of scale, bigger incentives to invest, level playing fields and benefits that are shared across all parts of society. Without this collaboration, the transition to net zero emissions will be much more challenging and could be delayed by decades.”

“The energy and climate crisis has exposed the weaknesses and vulnerabilities of a system heavily reliant on fuels of the 20th century. Anything short of radical and immediate action will ultimately eliminate the chance of staying on the 1.5°C path,” said Francesco La Camera, Director-General of IRENA. “The Breakthrough Agenda and our joint report sends a strong signal ahead of COP27 that greater international collaboration can amplify ambition and accelerate progress. Advancing the transition to renewables is a strategic choice to bring affordable energy, jobs, economic growth and a cleaner environment to the people on the ground.”

The report puts forward 25 recommendations for leaders to discuss at the Global Clean Energy Action Forum and the 13th Clean Energy Ministerial to be held in Pittsburgh, United States, from 21-23 September 2022.

These include:

Demonstrate and test flexible low-carbon power systems to expand the range of solutions and increase the share of variable renewables

Create new cross-border supergrids this decade to increase trade in low-carbon power, reduce emissions, improve energy security and enhance system flexibility

Set up new international centres of expertise to channel finance and technical assistance to help coal-producing countries’ transition

Agree a common definition and target dates by which all new road vehicles will be net zero, targeting 2035 for cars and vans and the 2040s for heavy duty vehicles

Mobilise investment in charging infrastructure, including prioritised assistance for developing countries and harmonise international charging standards to drive investment and accelerate adoption globally

Standards to boost the recyclability of batteries and supercharging research into alternative chemistries for batteries to reduce reliance on precious metals, such as cobalt and lithium

Government policies and private-sector purchase commitments to drive demand and deployment of low-carbon and renewable hydrogen alongside standards to enable global trade

Public and private commitments to purchase near-zero emission steel, and actions to level the playing field between steel producing nations

Investment for agriculture technologies and farming practices that can cut emissions from livestock and fertilisers, expand availability of alternative proteins and accelerate the development of climate resilient crops

International standards for monitoring and reporting on the state of natural resources on which agriculture depends, covering soil health, soil carbon content, and pollinator health

The report highlights that in addition to delivering urgent emissions reductions, stronger collaboration will both deliver a faster and a cheaper transition, while boosting jobs growth. Research from the IEA shows that without international collaboration, the transition to net zero global emissions could be delayed by decades. While new research cited by the report shows that some technology costs may decline by as much as 18% by 2030. And IRENA estimates cited by the report suggest an energy transition aligned with limiting global temperature increase to 1.5°C could create close to 85 million additional jobs by 2030 compared to 2019, more than offsetting losses of 12 million jobs.

“This report highlights the need to ensure affordable access to clean and green sources of energy for all. This is also a strong reminder on the need for a focus on implementation, which must be the priority at the national, regional and local level, in order to have the necessary impact globally as well as the need for mobilization of appropriate finance," said Dr Mahmoud Mohieldin, UN Climate Change High-Level Champion for Egypt.

“Countries with the thousands of non-state actors running the Race to Zero and Race to Resilience must collaborate more strongly to drive forward the transition to affordable zero emission solutions in each emitting sector of the economy,” said Nigel Topping, UN Climate Change High-Level Champion for the UK. “This is as essential for development as it is for avoiding dangerous climate change. Clear steps must be taken at COP27 to implement the Breakthrough Agenda commitment to collective action that makes clean technologies affordable and available to all who need them throughout the world.”
Hungary’s transition to clean energy can enable it to achieve greater energy security and independence as it navigates the supply challenges that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has created for countries across Europe, according to a new in-depth policy review by the International Energy Agency.

Hungary has a strong starting point for its energy transition thanks to rapid growth of solar PV and a solid base of nuclear power. But it still has considerable work ahead to achieve its objectives for emissions reductions and energy sovereignty.

Since the IEA’s last in-depth energy policy review in 2017, Hungary has increased its climate ambitions. In 2020, it became one of the first countries in Central Europe to put a carbon neutrality goal for 2050 into law and presented a long-term National Clean Development Strategy the following year. Hungary is aiming for 90% of its electricity generation to come from low-carbon sources by 2030.

However, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has created a new set of energy security challenges in Europe. In response to the current global energy crisis, Hungary declared a state of energy emergency in July 2022 that allowed the government to increase domestic gas and coal production, secure additional gas imports from Russia and increase the output of the Mátra coal power plant. The government is also considering extending the lifetime of the four reactors at the country’s Paks nuclear power plant, which guarantees almost 50% of Hungary’s electricity supply.

“Prioritising energy efficiency and renewables is a pragmatic approach that aligns with Hungary’s energy and climate goals in the short term and the long term. It can avoid increases in both fossil fuel imports and emissions,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol as the IEA released the report today.

Attila Steiner, Hungary's State Secretary for Energy and Climate Policy, said: “Hungary has a strong commitment to renewables. As the next step, the government's priority is to upgrade the national grid to be capable of integrating the rapidly growing electric capacity generated by weather-dependent energy sources. However, to guarantee supply security and reach our ambitions climate goals, it is imperative to maintain or even increase our reliable and emission-free nuclear capacity as well.”

As a landlocked country, Hungary is today heavily reliant on Russia for natural gas, oil and nuclear fuel imports and new nuclear investment. The IEA review calls on Hungary to reduce fossil fuel consumption and diversify its energy sources towards a broader portfolio of renewables by drawing on the considerable potential of its wind and geothermal energy resources as well as extending the lifetime of existing reactors, where safety permits.

At the same time, Hungary should make the best use possible of its energy market interconnections, which it has significantly increased in recent years, to get energy supplies from diverse routes, sources and suppliers. The IEA report highlights that Hungary has a critical role to play in the major task of improving Central and Eastern European countries’ links to regional gas storage sites and new LNG terminals elsewhere in the European Union.

The IEA report recommends that the Hungarian government adopt additional targets and policies to lower fossil fuel consumption, increase energy efficiency and promote investment in clean energy technologies, skills and jobs. Paying close attention to ensuring a fair transition, including providing adequate support for people and communities associated with the Mátra coal plant, will be crucial to secure a smooth phase-out of coal.

“A stronger focus on investment in clean energy technologies is critical,” Dr Birol said. “Hungary has a huge opportunity to develop hydrogen for industrial sectors. Continued investment in developing its solar PV, geothermal and wind resources will allow Hungary to reduce its reliance on natural gas and coal in both heating and power generation. Hungary possesses the technologies it needs to advance its transition toward a clean and more secure energy system, which in turn will improve regional energy security.”
Global employment in the energy sector has risen above its pre-pandemic levels, led by increased hiring in clean energy, according to a new IEA report that offers the first worldwide benchmark for employment across energy industries.

The inaugural edition of the World Energy Employment Report, which will be published annually, maps energy sector employment by technology and value chain segment. The report provides a data-rich foundation for policy makers and industry decision makers to understand the labour-related impacts of clean energy transitions and shifts in energy supply chains following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

The amount of energy jobs worldwide has recovered from disruptions due to Covid-19, increasing above its pre-pandemic level of over 65 million people, or around 2% of the total labour force. The growth has been driven by hiring in clean energy sectors. The oil and gas sector, meanwhile, saw some of the largest declines in employment at the start of the pandemic and has yet to fully recover.

With the recent rebound, clean energy surpassed the 50% mark for its share of total energy employment, with nearly two-thirds of workers involved in building new projects and manufacturing clean energy technologies. At the same time, the oil and gas sector is also experiencing an upswing in employment, with new projects under development, notably new liquefied natural gas (LNG) infrastructure.

The energy sector is set to see its fastest employment growth in recent years in 2022, however high input costs and inflationary pressures are adding to hiring and supply chain challenges already present in some regions and subsectors, such as solar, wind, oil, and gas. Policy responses to the pandemic and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, including the US Inflation Reduction Act, will continue to add to new hiring demand and to shifting the status-quo of global energy supply chains.

Energy jobs counted in this report span the value chain, with around a third of workers in energy fuel supply (coal, oil, gas and bioenergy), a third in the power sector (generation, transmission, distribution and storage), and a third in key energy end uses (vehicle manufacturing and energy efficiency). More than half of energy employment is in the Asia-Pacific region. This reflects rapidly expanding energy infrastructure in the region and access to lower-cost labour that has enabled the emergence of manufacturing hubs that serve both local and export markets, notably for solar, electric vehicles and batteries. China alone accounts for 30% of the global energy workforce.

In all IEA scenarios, clean energy employment is set to grow, outweighing declines in fossil fuels jobs. In the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario, 14 million new clean energy jobs are created by 2030, while another 16 million workers switch to new roles related to clean energy. New energy jobs may not always be in the same location nor require the same skills as the jobs they replace, requiring policy makers to focus on job training and capacity building to ensure that energy transitions benefit as many people as possible.

“Countries around the world are responding to the current crisis by seeking to accelerate the growth of homegrown clean energy industries. The regions that make this move will see huge growth in jobs,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “Seizing this opportunity requires skilled workers. Governments, companies, labour representatives and educators must come together to develop the programmes and accreditations needed to cultivate this workforce and ensure the jobs created are quality jobs that can attract a diverse workforce.”

Around 45% of the world’s energy workers are in high-skilled occupations, compared with about 25% for the wider economy. Some fossil fuel companies are retraining workers internally for positions in low-carbon areas to retain talent or to maintain flexibility as needs arise. However, this is not an option everywhere, and ensuring a people-centred and just transition for affected workers must remain a focus for policy makers, especially in the coal sector where employment has been declining consistently for several years.
The first fallacy he addresses in the opinion article, which is also available to read in full on LinkedIn, is that Russia is winning the energy battle. Russia may have benefitted from spikes in oil and gas prices triggered by its invasion of Ukraine, but any short-term gain from rising export revenue is more than offset by the long-term loss of both trust and markets, Dr Birol notes. Moscow has alienated the European Union, its largest customer, and sanctions on its oil and gas sector will hurt its future ability to exploit its resources by cutting access to vital technologies.



The second mistaken idea is that the global energy crisis is a clean energy crisis. Dr Birol says energy policy makers don’t complain to him about relying too much on clean energy. On the contrary, they regret not having moved faster on solar, wind and energy efficiency. Blaming clean energy and climate policies for today’s global energy crisis moves the spotlight away from the real culprits – the gas supply crunch and Russia, he argues.



The third false narrative is that the current energy crisis will set back efforts to tackle climate change. Today’s crisis is a reminder of the unsustainability of our reliance on fossil fuels and can be a key turning point to move faster towards a cleaner, more affordable and more secure energy system, Dr Birol writes. The Inflation Reduction Act in the United States, the REPowerEU package in Europe and actions by other major economies underscore the gathering momentum behind clean energy. The oil shocks of the 1970s spurred vital progress in energy efficiency, nuclear power, solar and wind – and there’s no reason today’s energy crisis can’t drive even greater positive changes, Dr Birol says.



The full article is available on the Financial Times website for those who have a subscription – and on LinkedIn.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol addressed energy ministers from the world’s biggest economies today at the G20 Energy Transitions Ministerial Meeting in Bali, Indonesia, where he urged them to prioritise actions to ensure secure, affordable and sustainable energy in response to the crisis the world currently faces.

The Ministerial, held under the G20 Presidency of Indonesia and chaired by Indonesia’s Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources Arifin Tasrif, took place against the backdrop of the major turmoil in global energy markets triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

In his remarks, Dr Birol highlighted the impact of the surge in energy prices on the developing world where it is depriving people of the ability to pay for essential electricity and clean cooking services. He stressed that the best way out of the crisis is a massive increase in clean energy investment, especially in emerging and developing economies, and called on advanced economies to mobilise more financing to support clean energy transitions in the developing world.

“I firmly believe that the G20 – as the premier global forum for dealing with major economic challenges – has not only an opportunity but also a responsibility to take action on this issue,” he said.

The IEA has played a major role supporting the energy transitions agenda of Indonesia’s G20 Presidency this year, reflecting the deep and long-term cooperation between the Agency and the Indonesian government. During the G20 Ministerial, Minister Tasrif and Dr Birol launched the IEA’s new Energy Sector Roadmap to Net Zero Emissions in Indonesia – a collaborative project undertaken with the Indonesian Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources – in front of an audience of Ministers from around the world. Minister Tasrif and Dr Birol also signed a Joint High-Level Statement that sets out a shared vision of Indonesia’s path to net zero, drawing on the two organisations’ joint work.

Another key IEA input to the G20 Ministerial was a new report on the Security of Clean Energy Transitions that provides governments, notably those within the G20, with recommendations for maintaining and improving energy security while accelerating clean energy transitions towards net zero.

On the sidelines of the Ministerial, Dr Birol had bilateral and pull-aside meetings with a series of Ministers, including Australia’s Minister of Climate Change and Energy Chris Bowen; India’s Minister of Power and New & Renewable Energy Raj Kumar Singh; Japan’s Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry Yasutoshi Nishimura; Singapore’s Minister for Manpower & Second Minister for Trade and Industry Tan See Leng; and Japan’s Parliamentary Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs Kei Takagi.
Indonesia has a viable path to reaching its target of net zero emissions by 2060, bringing major benefits to its citizens in the process such as more secure and affordable energy supplies, according to a new IEA report released today. But key policy reforms and international support will be crucial to the success of the clean energy transition in the world’s fourth most populous country as it enters a new phase of its economic development.

The IEA’s Energy Sector Roadmap to Net Zero Emissions in Indonesia – a collaborative project undertaken with the Indonesian Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR) at the request of the Government of Indonesia – was launched today at the G20 Energy Transitions Ministerial Meeting in Bali under Indonesia’s first G20 Presidency. IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol and Indonesia’s Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources Arifin Tasrif also signed a Joint High-Level Statement that sets out a shared vision of Indonesia’s path to net zero, drawing on the Roadmap’s findings.

Indonesia’s economic development over the past half century has been a remarkable success story, lifting millions of people out of poverty and bringing electricity to almost all citizens across the country’s 17 000 islands. Access to affordable supplies of energy from the country’s abundant resources as well as revenues from fossil fuel exports have been important drivers of this success.

Today, the clean energy transition offers huge opportunities for the next chapter of Indonesia’s development as it seeks to become an advanced economy by 2045. According to the IEA Roadmap, many of the ingredients for reaching net zero emissions and advanced economy status are the same: innovation, knowledge, technology, and economic diversification.

For instance, Indonesia’s export revenues from critical minerals, which are needed for many clean energy technologies, are set to be greater in 2030 than its largest ever export revenues from coal. And even bigger opportunities exist if Indonesia can capture more of the clean energy value chain. At the same time, the clean energy transition and economic diversification will have significant impacts on Indonesia’s coal-producing regions, demanding attention from policy makers to ensure a fair and people-centred transition.

The IEA Roadmap shows that by reaching net zero by 2060, Indonesia would reduce total household energy bills as a share of income from today’s level. For the country’s economy as a whole, the pathway to net zero by 2060 would lower oil import bills by one-third in 2030 compared with a business-as-usual scenario. This saving on oil imports would by itself cover the extra cost the transition would require in terms of new investments – meaning that the transition would effectively pay for itself. An even more ambitious transition by Indonesia and other countries around the world, as envisaged in the IEA’s global Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario, would yield even greater savings, the analysis shows.

"Indonesia has the opportunity to show the world that even for a country that relies heavily on fossil fuel exports, a pathway to net zero emissions is not only feasible but also beneficial,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “We must be clear-eyed about the challenges, especially in areas that depend on the coal industry, but the economic opportunities more than compensate for the costs.”

“This Roadmap – which reflects the IEA’s status as the global authority and was conducted hand-in-hand with my Ministry – sets out a clear and achievable path forward, based on energy efficiency, renewables and electrification,” said Indonesia’s Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources Arifin Tasrif. “This demonstrates that a transition to net zero in Indonesia can be just, affordable and rich with opportunities.”

The IEA report stresses that the technologies Indonesia needs for the initial steps in its journey to net zero – such as energy efficiency solutions, solar, wind and electric vehicles – are already commercially available today and cost-effective, provided that the right policies are put in place.

Enforcing energy performance standards, especially for air conditioners, and supporting electrification of transport and cooking are essential to lower energy costs and emissions at the same time. Indonesian homes are set to add another 20 million air conditioners by 2030, shifting to the best available technologies could avoid annual electricity demand equivalent to the output of around 10 coal power plants.

Driving rapid expansion of renewables, especially solar, demands an immediate and sustained policy push. Solar projects in Indonesia are currently more than twice as costly as those in similar emerging market countries. But costs can be brought down by introducing transparent and competitive tariffs and a predictable project pipeline. At the same time, by allowing coal plants to operate more flexibly and remunerating them for it, Indonesia can reduce power system costs by more than 5% and help free up the space in the power system that needs to go to renewables.

To achieve net zero by 2060, Indonesia will need to almost triple energy investment by 2030 from today’s level. That means an extra USD 8 billion in investment a year by the end of this decade compared with the level in a business-as-usual pathway. Mobilising that additional financing will hinge on policy reforms and international financial support for which Just Energy Transition Partnerships (JET-P), as endorsed by G7 Leaders at their Summit in June, can provide a framework. International cooperation will also be critical to bring technologies such as nuclear power, hydrogen and carbon capture to market in Indonesia and to reduce costs.

“As a long-term and steadfast partner to Indonesia, the IEA is committed to continuing to provide leading analysis and practical solutions to help Indonesia achieve its energy and climate goals,” said Dr Birol. “I call on Indonesia’s international partners to do their part by mobilising clean energy finance through a Just Energy Transition Partnership and ensuring much needed technology transfers. The results will bring major benefits for both Indonesia and the world.”
Major economies sharply increased support for the production and consumption of coal, oil and natural gas, with many countries struggling to balance longstanding pledges to phase out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies with efforts to protect households from surging energy prices, according to analysis released today by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the International Energy Agency.

New OECD and IEA data show that overall government support for fossil fuels in 51 countries worldwide almost doubled to 697.2 USD billion in 2021, from 362.4 USD billion in 2020, as energy prices rose with the rebound of the global economy. In addition, consumption subsidies are anticipated to rise even further in 2022 due to higher fuel prices and energy use.

“Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine has caused sharp increases in energy prices and undermined energy security. Significant increases in fossil fuel subsidies encourage wasteful consumption though, while not necessarily reaching low-income households,” OECD Secretary-General Mathias Cormann said. “We need to adopt measures which protect consumers from the extreme impacts of shifting market and geopolitical forces in a way that helps keep us on track to carbon neutrality as well as energy security and affordability.”

“Fossil fuel subsidies are a roadblock to a more sustainable future, but the difficulty that governments face in removing them is underscored at times of high and volatile fuel prices. A surge in investment in clean energy technologies and infrastructure is the only lasting solution to today’s global energy crisis and the best way to reduce the exposure of consumers to high fuel costs,” IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol said.

The OECD and IEA produce complementary databases that provide estimates of different forms of government support for fossil fuels. The current OECD-IEA combined estimates cover 51 major economies, spanning the OECD, G20 and 33 other major energy producing and consuming economies representing around 85% of the world’s total energy supply.

OECD analysis of budgetary transfers and tax breaks linked to the production and use of coal, oil, gas and other petroleum products in G20 economies showed total fossil fuel support rose to USD 190 billion in 2021 from USD 147 billion in 2020. Support for producers reached levels not previously seen in OECD tracking efforts, at USD 64 billion in 2021 – up by almost 50% year-on-year, and 17% above 2019 levels. Those subsidies have partly offset producer losses from domestic price controls as global energy prices surged in late 2021. The estimate of consumer support reached USD 115 billion, up from USD 93 billion in 2020.

The IEA produces estimates of fossil fuel subsidies by comparing prices on international markets and prices paid by domestic consumers that are kept artificially low using measures like direct price regulation, pricing formulas, border controls or taxes, and domestic purchase or supply mandates. Covering 42 economies, the IEA finds that consumer support increased to USD 531 billion in 2021, more than triple their 2020 level, driven by the surge in energy prices.

The OECD and IEA have consistently called for the phasing out of inefficient fossil fuel support and re-direction of public funding toward the development of low-carbon alternatives alongside improvements in energy security and energy efficiency. Subsidies intended to support low-income households often tend to favour wealthier households that use more fuel and energy and should therefore be replaced with more targeted forms of support.

For further information, journalists are invited to contact Catherine Bremer in the OECD Media Office (+33 1 45 24 97 00) or Merve Erdil at the IEA Press Office (+33 1 40 57 66 94).

Working with over 100 countries, the OECD is a global policy forum that promotes policies to preserve individual liberty and improve the economic and social well-being of people around the world.
The world’s consumption of coal is set to rise slightly in 2022, taking it back to the record level it reached nearly a decade ago, according to an IEA report published today, which notes that significant uncertainty hangs over the outlook for coal as a result of slowing economic growth and energy market turbulence.

Based on current economic and market trends, global coal consumption is forecast to rise by 0.7% in 2022 to 8 billion tonnes, assuming the Chinese economy recovers as expected in the second half of the year, the IEA’s July 2022 Coal Market Update says. This global total would match the annual record set in 2013, and coal demand is likely to increase further next year to a new all-time high.

The new report highlights the significant turmoil in coal markets in recent months, which has important implications for many countries where coal remains a key fuel for electricity generation and a range of industrial processes. At the same time, the world’s continued burning of large amounts of coal is heightening climate concerns, as coal is the largest single source of energy-related CO2 emissions.

Worldwide coal consumption rebounded by about 6% in 2021 as the global economy recovered rapidly from the initial shock of the Covid pandemic. That sharp rise contributed significantly to the largest ever annual increase in global energy-related CO2 emissions in absolute terms, putting them at their highest level in history.

Global coal demand is being propped up this year by rising natural gas prices, which have intensified gas-to-coal switching in many countries, as well as economic growth in India. Those factors are being partly offset by slowing economic growth in China and by the inability of some major coal producers to ramp up production.

Demand for coal in India has been strong since the start of 2022 and is expected to rise by 7% for the full year as the country’s economy grows and the use of electricity expands. In China, coal demand is estimated to have declined by 3% in the first half of 2022 as renewed Covid lockdowns in some cities slowed economic growth, but an expected increase in the second half of the year is likely to bring coal consumption for the full year back to the same levels as last year. China and India together consume double the amount of coal as the rest of the world combined, with China alone accounting for more than half the world’s demand.

Coal consumption in the European Union is expected to rise by 7% in 2022 on top of last year’s 14% jump. This is being driven by demand from the electricity sector where coal is increasingly being used to replace gas, which is in short supply and has experienced huge price spikes following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Several EU countries are extending the life of coal plants scheduled for closure, reopening closed plants or raising caps on their operating hours to reduce gas consumption. However, Europe only accounts for about 5% of global coal consumption.



As soaring natural gas prices have made coal more competitive in many markets, international coal prices have risen in turn, hitting three all-time peaks between October 2021 and May 2022. Sanctions and bans on Russian coal following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine have disrupted markets, and issues in other major exporters have contributed to supply shortages. With other coal producers facing constraints in replacing Russian output, prices on coal futures markets indicate that tight market conditions are expected to continue well into next year and beyond.
The International Energy Agency has been warning for many months that the world is experiencing the first truly global energy crisis in history – and the coming months will be particularly challenging.

The natural gas crisis in Europe has been building for a while, and Russia’s role in it has been clear from the beginning. In September 2021 – five months before Russia’s invasion of Ukraine – the IEA pointed out that Russia was preventing a significant amount of gas from reaching Europe. The Agency raised the alarm further in January, with Executive Director Fatih Birol highlighting that Russia’s large and unjustified reductions in supplies to Europe were creating “artificial tightness” in markets and driving up prices at exactly the same time as tensions were rising over Ukraine.

Following Russia’s attack on Ukraine in February, the IEA has responded rapidly with vital analysis, policy advice and support for governments, including the 10-Point Plan to Reduce the European Union’s Reliance on Russian Natural Gas that was published just a week after the invasion. Dr Birol has provided the latest IEA insights and recommendations to international leaders, including at the G7 Summit in Elmau, Germany, in June and a meeting of the European Commission in July. As Europe’s gas crisis intensified during the summer months, the IEA on 18 July highlighted five immediate coordinated actions the European Union can take to prevent a major gas crunch this winter.

See below for key IEA statements, publications and other communications since September 2021:

21 September 2021

7 October 2021

12 January 2022

13 January 2022

22 February 2022

3 March 2022

17 March 2022

24 March 2022

15 April 2022

21 April 2022

24 May 2022

21 June 2022

5 July 2022

18 July 2022




The world’s electricity demand growth is slowing sharply in 2022 from its strong recovery the previous year as economic growth weakens and energy prices soar following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, according to the IEA’s latest Electricity Market Report.

Global electricity demand is expected to grow by 2.4% in 2022 after last year’s 6% increase, bringing it in line with its average growth rate over the five years prior to the Covid-19 pandemic, the new report says. While electricity demand is currently expected to continue on a similar growth path into 2023, the outlook is clouded by economic turbulence and uncertainty over how fuel prices could impact the generation mix.

Strong capacity additions are set to push up global renewable power generation by more than 10% in 2022, displacing some fossil fuel generation. Despite nuclear’s 3% decline, low-carbon generation is set to rise by 7% overall, leading to a 1% drop in total fossil fuel-based generation. As a result, carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from the global electricity sector are set to decline in 2022 from the all-time high they reached in 2021, albeit by less than 1%.

In the first half of 2022, average natural gas prices in Europe were four times as high as in the same period in 2021 while coal prices were more than three times as high, resulting in wholesale electricity prices more than tripling in many markets. The IEA’s price index for major global electricity wholesale markets reached levels that were twice the first-half average of the 2016-2021 period.

Due to high gas prices and supply constraints, coal is replacing natural gas for power generation in markets with spare coal plant capacity, particularly in European countries seeking to end their reliance on Russian gas imports. To secure energy supplies following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, some European countries have delayed coal phase-out plans and lifted previously imposed restrictions on coal.

Globally, coal use for power is expected to increase slightly in 2022 as growth in Europe is balanced by contractions in China, due to strong renewables’ growth and only a modest rise in electricity demand, and the United States, due to constraints on supply and coal power plant capacity. Gas power is expected to fall by 2.6% as declines in Europe and South America outweigh growth in North America and the Middle East.

“The world is in the midst of the first truly global energy crisis, triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and the electricity sector is one of the most heavily affected,” said IEA Director of Energy Markets and Security Keisuke Sadamori. “This is especially evident in Europe, which is experiencing severe energy market turmoil, and in emerging and developing economies, where supply disruptions and soaring fuel prices are putting huge strains on fragile power systems and resulting in blackouts. Governments are having to resort to emergency measures to tackle the immediate challenges, but they also need to focus on accelerating investment in clean energy transitions as the most effective lasting response to the current crisis.”
Ukraine officially joined the International Energy Agency as an Association country today, with the signing of a joint declaration by Ukraine’s Minister of Energy German Galushchenko and IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol.

The signing of the Joint Association Declaration at a ceremony in Warsaw, Poland, opens a new chapter in the long-standing partnership between the IEA and Ukraine to deepen and expand their work on the country’s energy security, clean energy transition and reconstruction efforts. The signing took place in the presence of Polish Climate and Environment Minister Anna Moskwa.

The IEA Governing Board agreed on June 16 to welcome Ukraine as the IEA’s 11th Association country, reflecting the Agency’s full support for Ukraine in the face of Russia’s aggression. The Governing Board’s decision highlighted Ukraine’s important energy security role and IEA support for its reconstruction efforts.

“The IEA has been working with Ukraine for almost two decades, and in these particularly challenging times following Russia’s unprovoked invasion, we are further strengthening the relationship to support Ukraine’s significant reconstruction needs and help it build a new energy future,” said Dr Birol. “Ukraine has an important energy security role in Europe and beyond – and it has set ambitious goals to increase energy trade with Europe and transition to cleaner energy. I’m delighted to be signing the Joint Declaration with Minister Galushchenko to expand our cooperation for achieving these goals.”

"Solidarity is becoming even more important in these times of crisis. Only by being united, are we all able to implement the International Energy Agency’s mission to shape a secure and sustainable energy future,” said Minister Galushchenko. “As a part of Europe and as a candidate for EU membership, Ukraine is ready to take an active role in strengthening energy security in the region.”

The Joint Declaration states that Ukraine and the IEA intend to work together to develop policy and build capacity in a wide range of energy­related fields, including market analysis, energy system reconstruction, energy security, efficiency, accelerated energy transitions, hydrogen and biomethane, and energy data and statistics. The specific initiatives are to be agreed upon in two-year joint work programmes.

The IEA has a long history of cooperation with Ukraine. Since 2007, the Agency has conducted four in-depth policy reviews and organised policy events and energy data capacity building in Kyiv and Odesa. The Agency has worked closely with Ukraine through the European Commission’s EU4Energy programme. The IEA also recently completed a roadmap looking at how Ukraine can harness energy demand restraint, a topic that had been a priority for the government.

The IEA’s Association framework allows the IEA to work closely and deepen cooperation with its partner countries, sharing analysis, data and best practices. Ukraine is the IEA’s 11th Association country. The framework was established in 2015 and the other Association countries are Argentina, Brazil, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Morocco, Singapore, South Africa and Thailand. IEA family members now represent some 75% of global energy demand.



During his time in Warsaw today, Dr Birol is holding bilateral meetings with Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki of Poland, Minister Galushchenko and Minister Moskwa. Later in the day, Dr Birol, Minister Galushchenko, Minister Moskwa and US Deputy Energy Secretary David Turk will take part in a livestreamed panel discussion on energy security.


Global energy and climate leaders are meeting this week at the Sydney Energy Forum, which is co-hosted by the Australian Government and the IEA, to discuss how to scale up and strengthen supply chains for the clean energy technologies needed for a secure and affordable transition to net zero emissions.

Prime Minister Anthony Albanese of Australia opened the event, with high-level participants including IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol; Australian Minister for Climate Change and Energy Chris Bowen; US Secretary of Energy Jennifer M. Granholm; Japanese Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry Koichi Hagiuda; Samoan Minister of Natural Resources and Environment Toeolesulusulu Cedric Schuster; Indian Minister of Power, New and Renewable Energy Raj Kumar Singh; and Indonesian Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources Arifin Tasrif. Top leaders from industry and finance also took part.

The discussions at the Sydney Energy Forum on 12-13 July reflect the importance of international dialogue and cooperation for achieving energy security and climate goals – and the central role of the IEA in these efforts. Governments around the world are seeking to bring greenhouse gas emissions down to net zero and limit the worst effects of climate change. This is set to redefine global energy security to include the supply of the minerals, materials and manufacturing capacity needed to deliver clean energy technologies.

The pressure on these supply chains from Covid-related lockdowns has been compounded by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, with supply disruptions and soaring prices affecting a wide range of key commodities. This turmoil risks undermining the pace of clean energy transitions, such as by hindering the production of EVs or the deployment of renewables, calling for astute action by governments to counter these challenges.

“To durably address the challenges we’re facing from today’s global energy crisis, we need an immediate and massive expansion of clean energy technologies to build a resilient and affordable energy system,” Dr Birol said. “Establishing secure and sustainable supply chains for these technologies is essential, so I’m very pleased that decision-makers from around the world have come together for these discussions led by the Australian Government and the IEA to strengthen international action.”

To inform the conversations at the Sydney Energy Forum, the IEA has published a series of new studies, including a Special Report on Solar PV Global Supply Chains and an analysis of Global Supply Chains of EV Batteries. The issues affecting different technologies are brought together in the cross-cutting Securing Clean Energy Technology Supply Chains report, which assesses current and future supply chain needs for key technologies – including solar PV, EV batteries and low emissions hydrogen – and provides a framework for governments and industry to identify, assess and respond to emerging opportunities and vulnerabilities. That report is a precursor to the 2023 edition of Energy Technology Perspectives, an IEA flagship publication, which will present detailed analysis on what is needed to develop and expand a range of clean energy technology supply chains to achieve net zero emissions.

Reflecting the IEA’s growing role in this space, IEA member governments mandated the Agency in March to work on steps to improve the security of global supplies of critical minerals needed for clean energy transitions, making this a major expanding area of work.

The Securing Clean Energy Technology Supply Chains report contains specific insights for the Indo-Pacific region, which is home to many major raw material producers such as Australia for lithium and Indonesia for nickel. The report identifies five pillars for governments and industry action: Diversify, Accelerate, Innovate, Collaborate and Invest. It recommends improving the efficiency and speed of permitting and approvals for clean energy projects and critical mineral production, while maintaining high environmental and labour standards. It also calls for coordinated measures to bolster supply chain resilience including consideration of stockpiles for critical minerals, as has been done for oil for half a century, and promoting robust recycling industries to reduce demand for raw materials.

The report recommends increasing and prioritising investment in research, development and demonstration to spawn technologies and manufacturing processes that rely on smaller quantities of critical minerals or on a more diversified mix, as well as in training to ensure an appropriately skilled workforce along clean energy technology supply chains.
Ensuring a secure transition to net zero emissions will require increased efforts to expand and diversify global production of solar panels whose global supply chains are currently heavily concentrated in China, the IEA said in a new special report released today.

Chinese industrial and innovation policies focused on expanding solar panel production and markets have helped solar PV become the most affordable electricity generation technology in many parts of the world. However, this has also led to imbalances in solar PV supply chains, according to the IEA Special Report on Solar PV Global Supply Chains, the first study of its kind by the Agency.

Global manufacturing capacity for solar panels has increasingly moved out of Europe, Japan and the United States over the last decade and into China, which has taken the lead on investment and innovation. China’s share in all the key manufacturing stages of solar panels exceeds 80% today, according to the report, and for key elements including polysilicon and wafers, this is set to rise to more than 95% in the coming years, based on current manufacturing capacity under construction.

“China has been instrumental in bringing down costs worldwide for solar PV, with multiple benefits for clean energy transitions,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “At the same time, the level of geographical concentration in global supply chains also poses potential challenges that governments need to address. Accelerating clean energy transitions around the world will put further strain on these supply chains to meet growing demand, but this also offers opportunities for other countries and regions to help diversify production and make it more resilient.”

Meeting international energy and climate goals requires the global deployment of solar PV to grow on an unprecedented scale. This in turn demands a major additional expansion in manufacturing capacity, raising concerns about the world’s ability to rapidly develop resilient supply chains. For example, annual additions of solar PV capacity to electricity systems around the world need to more than quadruple by 2030 to be on track with the IEA’s pathway to reaching net zero emissions by 2050. Global production capacity for the key building blocks of solar panels – polysilicon, ingots, wafers, cells and modules – would need to more than double by 2030 from today’s levels and existing production facilities would need to be modernised.

“As countries accelerate their efforts to reduce emissions, they need to ensure that their transition towards a sustainable energy system is built on secure foundations,” Dr Birol said. “Solar PV’s global supply chains will need to be scaled up in a way that ensures they are resilient, affordable and sustainable.”

Governments and other stakeholders around the world have begun to pay increasing attention to solar PV’s manufacturing supply chains as high commodity prices and supply chain bottlenecks have led to an increase of around 20% in solar panel prices over the last year. These challenges – particularly apparent in the market for polysilicon, a key material for making solar panels – have resulted in delays in solar PV deliveries across the globe and higher prices. The IEA special report argues that these challenges call for even greater attention and efforts by policy makers going forward.

The report examines solar PV supply chains from raw materials all the way to the finished product, covering areas such as energy consumption, emissions, employment, production costs, investment, trade and financial performance. It finds, for example, that the electricity-intensive manufacturing of solar PV is mostly powered by fossil fuels today because of the prominent role of coal in the parts of China where production is concentrated – but that solar panels still only need to operate for four to eight months to offset their manufacturing emissions. This brief payback period compares with the average solar panel lifetime of around 25 to 30 years. Increasing decarbonisation of electricity supplies and greater diversification of solar PV supply chains should both help reduce this footprint in the future, the report notes.

Because diversification is one of the key strategies for reducing supply chain risks worldwide, the special report assesses the opportunities and challenges of developing solar PV supply chains in terms of job creation, investment requirements, manufacturing costs, emissions and recycling. It finds that new solar PV manufacturing facilities along the global supply chain could attract USD 120 billion of investment by 2030. And the solar PV sector has the potential to double the number of PV manufacturing jobs to 1 million by 2030, with the most job-intensive areas in the manufacturing of modules and cells.

The special report summarises policy approaches that governments have taken to support domestic solar PV manufacturing and highlights priority areas for action to improve security of supply and to address key challenges such as environmental and social sustainability, investment risks and cost competitiveness.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol said:

“On behalf of the International Energy Agency, I would like to express my deep condolences to the family, friends, colleagues and compatriots of Mohammed Sanusi Barkindo, the Secretary General of OPEC, who passed away yesterday. I consider myself fortunate to have worked with Mohammed for many years and to be able to call him a friend. Throughout his distinguished career, he displayed his many admirable qualities as a leader, scholar, diplomat and colleague. In the global energy sector, he was committed to playing a constructive role in promoting greater oil market transparency and worked tirelessly to encourage an open and constructive dialogue between energy producers and consumers in the interests of market stability. He will be greatly missed.”
More than 180 participants from 33 countries, including 9 of the 10 ASEAN Member States, will attend the Singapore-International Energy Agency (IEA) Regional Training Programme on Efficient Grid-Interactive Buildings from 5 to 7 July 2022.

This programme brings together policy makers, industry professionals, and representatives from academia, international organisations and civil society to explore the use of smart digital technologies to transform buildings from energy-intensive consumers to energy-efficient and low-carbon prosumers that can interact with the grid to produce, consume, store, sell and buy energy.

According to the IEA, the built environment contributes a quarter of total energy use in ASEAN with over 40% of this consumption coming from electricity generated mostly by fossil fuels. There is significant potential for the built environment – which encompasses buildings as well as the utility and transport networks that connect them – to reduce energy consumption by leveraging digital technologies to become smarter and more interactive. Tools such as smart meters and sensors, as well as artificial intelligence, enable energy system communications and controls to automatically shave and shift peak electricity demand, increasing the grid’s capability to respond to changes in supply and demand flexibly.

The virtual three-day training programme will introduce innovative solutions and applications for efficient smart grid-interactive buildings and energy systems. It will feature more than 40 experts from institutions around the world supporting the programme through presentations, breakout sessions, virtual networking and discussions, including ASEAN-based organisations, such as, the ASEAN Centre for Energy (ACE), the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) and the Building and Construction Authority (BCA) of Singapore.

Mr Jonathan Goh, Director, External Relations Department, Energy Market Authority (EMA) said: “Capacity building is key to our efforts in navigating today’s evolving energy landscape. We are delighted to continue our partnership with the IEA on training programmes for policy makers and industry professionals to support the region’s clean energy transitions.”

In her opening remarks Ms Mary Warlick, the IEA’s Deputy Executive Director, said: “Energy efficiency brings a lot of benefits besides saving energy and reducing CO2 emissions: it improves people’s lives, health, well-being and productivity, creates jobs, improves energy security and increases disposable incomes – just to name a few.”

The Efficient Grid-Interactive Buildings programme is the sixth activity under the Singapore-IEA Regional Training Hub initiative. The Singapore-IEA Regional Training Hub was launched in 2016 when Singapore became an Association Country of the IEA. Since 2017, the Singapore-IEA Training Hub has trained more than 1 000 participants from more than 20 countries. The programme represents a key milestone in establishing a network of energy professionals, academics, and urban practitioners to facilitate knowledge exchange and operational capabilities in clean energy transitions.

Singapore and the IEA will next co-host the Singapore-IEA Ministerial Roundtable on Energy Security in a Low-Carbon World on 26 October 2022. It will be held in conjunction with the 15th Singapore International Energy Week (SIEW) taking place from 25 to 28 October.
Global natural gas consumption is expected to contract slightly in 2022 and grow slowly over the following three years as Russia’s war in Ukraine pushes up prices and fuels fears of further supply disruptions, according to the IEA’s latest Gas Market Report.

Today’s record high gas prices are depressing demand and causing some gas users to switch to coal and oil, while recent sharp cuts in Russian gas flows to Europe are raising alarms about supplies ahead of the winter. The turmoil is damaging natural gas’ reputation as a reliable and affordable energy source, casting doubts about the role it was expected to play in helping developing economies meet rising energy demand and transition away from more carbon-intensive fuels.

The recent developments have led to a considerable downward revision of gas’ growth prospects. Global gas demand is set to rise by a total of 140 billion cubic metres (bcm) between 2021 and 2025, according to the new Gas Market Report – less than half the amount forecast previously and smaller than the 170 bcm increase seen in 2021 alone.

The downward revision in gas demand growth in the coming years is mostly the result of weaker economic activity and less switching from coal or oil to gas. Only one-fifth of it comes from efficiency gains and substituting renewables for gas, highlighting the need for greater progress on clean energy transitions. Faster roll-outs of renewable power generation and stronger efforts to use energy more efficiently would ease pressures on energy prices and help price-sensitive emerging markets access gas supplies that can deliver rapid improvements to air quality and carbon intensity.

“Russia’s unprovoked war in Ukraine is seriously disrupting gas markets that were already showing signs of tightness,” said IEA Director of Energy Markets and Security Keisuke Sadamori. “We are now seeing inevitable price spikes as countries around the world compete for LNG shipments, but the most sustainable response to today’s global energy crisis is stronger efforts and policies to use energy more efficiently and to accelerate clean energy transitions.”

The Asia-Pacific region is expected to account for half of the expected growth in global gas demand to 2025. In terms of sectors, industry is expected to account for 60% of global demand. However, those projections are subject to downward risks from high prices and potentially lower economic growth.

The European Union’s commitment to phase out gas imports from Russia – historically, its largest supplier – is having global repercussions, as Europe’s surging demand for LNG draws in deliveries initially intended for other regions. The Gas Market Report’s base case assumes that Russian pipeline gas exports to the EU will fall by over 55% between 2021 and 2025, but the report also considers an accelerated case in which they fall by over 75%.

LNG export capacity additions are set to slow down in the next three years as a result of curtailed investment plans during a period of lower prices in the mid-2010s and construction delays stemming from Covid-19 lockdowns. This raises the risk of prolonged tight market conditions. While there has been a recent surge in LNG investment decisions, the resulting infrastructure will not be operational until after 2025.


Kazakhstan has made ambitious commitments to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions and increase the role of renewables, but achieving these goals requires overcoming its dependence on cheap domestic coal and addressing its lack of flexible generating capacity, according to a new policy review by the International Energy Agency.

The report, Kazakhstan 2022, also notes that Kazakh government revenues face a long-term risk from the projected decline in global demand for fossil fuels, as well as short-term risks posed by a lack of alternatives to oil export routes that pass through Russia.

Kazakhstan generates more than 70% of its electricity from its abundant resources of coal but aims for other sources to supply half its power by 2050. This shift is intended to help meet the government’s ambitious goals of reducing the country’s greenhouse gas emissions to 15% below their 1990 levels by 2030 and of reaching carbon neutrality by 2060.

New electricity capacity is expected to take the form primarily of solar and wind – but also gas and hydro. The government is considering constructing its first commercial nuclear power plant, building on its role as one of the world’s largest sources of uranium.

The IEA review commends Kazakhstan for the successful auctions it has conducted to help lower tariffs for new renewable and gas-fired electricity capacity. But it notes that new capacity will have difficulty competing with the country’s coal-fired power plants as long as tariffs for the latter do not fully account for long-term replacement costs and for environmental and climate externalities.

As Kazakhstan expands renewables, more investment will be needed in flexible capacity such as gas-fired and hydro power plants to accommodate the variability of solar and wind output, the report says. Kazakhstan’s system currently relies significantly on electricity imports from Russia to cover imbalances and maintain frequency stability.

Pricing is also an issue in the gas sector, where Kazakhstan has successfully expanded its domestic supply network in recent years, in part to help diversify away from large-scale use of coal in industry and the household sector. However, low retail gas prices set by the regulator limit the price the national gas monopoly, QazaqGaz, can offer producers, who instead prefer to re-inject gas to boost oil production, which they can export at world prices. The IEA report points out that more attractive gas prices for producers would provide incentives to sell more of it, as well as to explore for and develop additional supply.

The report recognises that energy prices are a significant social concern in Kazakhstan. A rise in prices for liquified gas used in vehicles contributed to the unrest that gripped the country in January 2022. However, low prices have made it difficult to diversify the types of energy used for the domestic market and to promote energy efficiency. Kazakhstan could gain insights from the experiences of other countries that have successfully reduced or eliminated price distortions, according to the report, for example by phasing in increases over time and using end-user subsidies and compensation payments to shield the most vulnerable.

Kazakhstan has successfully attracted major international investors to its oil and gas sector and is currently the largest oil producer in Central Asia.

Around 80% of Kazakhstan’s oil is exported, with almost all of it passing through Russia via pipeline. However, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has highlighted the risks of relying on one transit county for nearly all crude exports, given tightening international sanctions on Russian fossil fuels. While Kazakhstan has so far avoided having sanctions applied to its crude exports via Russia, export flows via the Caspian Pipeline Consortium (CPC) have seen interruptions in recent months. The IEA report stresses that diversification of export routes is essential to Kazakhstan’s ability to sustain crude export levels, which remain vital for the country’s finances.
Uzbekistan should combine its ongoing broad energy market reforms with stronger measures to improve energy efficiency and the security of its electricity supply, according to a new policy review by the International Energy Agency.

Uzbekistan, with a fast-growing population and economy, in 2019 launched a multi-phase multi-year transition from a state-owned and subsidised energy sector to competitive gas, oil and electricity markets with significant private sector participation and cost-covering energy prices. The IEA congratulates the country for the progress made so far.

While domestic natural gas will continue to dominate Uzbekistan’s energy supply in the medium term, the government has decided to phase out gas exports by 2025 and direct its gas resources towards expanding petrochemicals production. At the same time, Uzbekistan plans to harness its significant but largely unexploited solar and wind potential to help build a cleaner power sector to 2030.

While energy use per capita is low, the country’s economy is one of the most energy-intensive in the world, partly because it still retains some of the highest levels of implied energy subsidies. Uzbekistan has massive room to improve energy efficiency, and the new report strongly encourages the government to recognise that greater efforts to use energy more productively can benefit the economy, reduce pollution and create jobs. The report recommends the rapid adoption of the laws, mandates and incentives needed to realise this efficiency potential.

The new IEA report proposes several ways to support Uzbekistan in its energy market reform. The gradual transition to competitive markets and withdrawal of subsidies should be accompanied by support measures for those most in need. For the reform to succeed, an independent and well-resourced energy regulator is also necessary. Furthermore, the debts of state-owned energy companies must be addressed and their finances put on more solid footing.

Successful electricity and gas market reforms would also attract new entrants and investment in the renewable electricity sector. Uzbekistan has recently started to develop its world-class potential for solar and wind power. The IEA welcomes the government’s plans to raise the share of renewable energy in total electricity supply from 10% in 2020 to 25% in 2030 . Solar power is covered in more detail in another recent publication by the IEA EU4Energy Programme, Solar Energy Policy in Uzbekistan: A Roadmap (March 2022).

Measures to diversify energy supply, cut subsidies and increase efficiency would also help limit air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. With further economic growth and urbanisation expected, the report encourages the government to integrate energy and climate considerations into long-term urban development and transport planning.

Electricity demand is set to double by 2030, according to government estimates. Responding to the growing demand and increasing share from variable solar and wind energy will require strengthening the power system. In the past two years, Uzbekistan and its Central Asian neighbours have experienced several blackouts in their interconnected power system. The IEA urges the government to address concerns over electricity security without delay. The power system infrastructure, which largely dates from the Soviet era, urgently needs to be expanded and modernised, and comprehensive electricity security plans and protocols developed, adopted and enforced.
As the world contends with a global energy crisis, nuclear power has the potential to play a significant role in helping countries to securely transition to energy systems dominated by renewables, according to a new special report by the IEA.

In countries that choose to continue or increase their use of nuclear power, it can reduce reliance on imported fossil fuels, cut carbon dioxide emissions and enable electricity systems to integrate higher shares of solar and wind power. Building sustainable and clean energy systems will be harder, riskier and more expensive without nuclear, according to the new report, Nuclear power and secure energy transitions: From today’s challenges to tomorrow’s clean energy systems.

Nuclear is today the second largest source of low emissions power after hydropower, with nuclear plants in 32 countries. About 63% of today’s nuclear generating capacity comes from plants that are more than 30 years old, since many were built in the aftermath of the 1970s oil shocks. But a range of both advanced and emerging economies have recently announced energy strategies that include substantial roles for nuclear power as well as considerable financial incentives to invest in it.

“In today’s context of the global energy crisis, skyrocketing fossil fuel prices, energy security challenges and ambitious climate commitments, I believe nuclear power has a unique opportunity to stage a comeback,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “However, a new era for nuclear power is by no means guaranteed. It will depend on governments putting in place robust policies to ensure safe and sustainable operation of nuclear plants for years to come – and to mobilise the necessary investments including in new technologies. And the nuclear industry must quickly address the issues of cost overruns and project delays that have bedevilled the construction of new plants in advanced economies. As a result, advanced economies have lost market leadership, as 27 out of 31 reactors that started construction since 2017 are Russian or Chinese designs.”

In the IEA’s global pathway to reach Net Zero Emissions by 2050, nuclear power doubles between 2020 and 2050, with construction of new plants needed in all countries that are open to the technology. Even so, by mid-century, nuclear only accounts for 8% of the global power mix, which is dominated by renewables.

Despite moves to extend the lifetimes of some existing plants, the nuclear fleet operating in advanced economies could shrink by one-third by 2030 without further efforts. While plant lifetime extensions require substantial investment, they generally yield a cost of electricity that is competitive with wind and solar in most regions.

Robust policies are needed to support the use of nuclear power and enhance its safety, but the industry also must do a better job at delivering projects below cost and within budget to guarantee that nuclear-generated electricity is competitive, according to the report. Government financing will remain necessary to mobilise new investment, not just for plants but also to develop the latest technologies. This is because there is rarely sufficient private sector finance for such capital-intensive and long-lived assets, particularly those exposed to significant policy risk.

A total of 19 countries currently have nuclear reactors under construction, demonstrating the recent momentum behind nuclear power that is likely to be further stimulated by recent spikes in oil, gas and electricity prices. At the same time, nuclear power faces public and political opposition in some countries, and the IEA makes no recommendations to countries that choose not to make use of it in their energy mix.

In the IEA’s Net Zero by 2050 pathway, half of the emissions reductions by mid-century come from technologies that are not yet commercially viable. This includes small modular reactors (SMRs), which are generally defined as advanced nuclear reactors with a capacity of less than 300 megawatts – or about one-third of a traditional plant. The lower cost, smaller size and reduced project risks of SMRs may improve social acceptance and attract private investment. There is increased support and interest in Canada, France, the United Kingdom and the United States for this promising technology.

SMRs could also reuse the sites of retired fossil fuel power plants, taking advantage of existing transmission, cooling water and skilled workforces. But the successful long-term deployment of SMRs hinges on strong support from policy makers starting now, not just to mobilise investment but also to streamline and harmonize regulatory frameworks.
As a resource-rich country on the leading edge of many clean energy technologies, Norway is uniquely well placed for the clean energy transition and now needs to advance strategies to tackle emissions in sectors where they are hardest to reduce in order to meet its ambitious climate targets, according to a new in-depth policy review by the International Energy Agency.

Since the IEA’s last policy review in 2017, Norway has remained a global pillar of energy security with its ample reserves of oil and gas produced in an environmentally responsible manner. Norway is a significant and reliable international supplier, exporting close to 90% of its energy production.

“I commend Norway’s efforts to boost its near-term oil and gas production in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, helping to stabilise global supplies, especially to its European neighbours,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol, who is launching the report today with Terje Aasland, Norway’s Minister of Petroleum and Energy. “At the same time, Norway is leading efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from oil and gas production, especially through the electrification of offshore platforms.”

Norway has updated its already ambitious climate targets with plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 90-95% from 1990 levels by 2050, excluding carbon sinks. The country’s robust carbon pricing system, under which 85% of domestic emissions are either covered by the European Union Emissions Trading System or subject to a carbon tax, provides a solid basis for delivering this goal.

Nonetheless, the report finds that Norway has considerable work ahead to meet its ambitious targets. Since the country has substantially electrified its energy demand and has already cut emissions from power generation to nearly zero, thanks to abundant hydropower, many of the easy wins for reducing emissions have already been achieved. The remaining reductions will be more complex, challenging and costly, notably in transport and industry.

The report notes that Norway’s existing energy sector expertise can help it achieve a successful energy and climate transition. If the right policies are put in place, Norway is well placed to decarbonise a wide range of sectors through technologies such as electric vehicles, hydrogen, and carbon capture, utilisation and storage. Norway is already a leader in carbon capture, and its impressive Longship project, which encompasses two full-scale capture facilities and one storage facility in the North Sea, will further help to advance this technology for the world.

The IEA report recommends that Norway leverage its renewables-based electricity system and develop detailed, long-term sector-by-sector roadmaps backed by specific policy measures.

“I believe Norway has an important opportunity to show the world how to undertake complex emissions reductions, an issue all countries will need to face,” said Dr Birol. “I hope this report will help Norway navigate its own path toward a low-emissions society and help lead the world on advancing low-carbon technologies.”
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol took part in the G7 Summit in Elmau, Germany, where he briefed world leaders on the IEA’s recommendations for responding to the global energy crisis.

At the invitation of Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany, the current holder of the G7 Presidency, Dr Birol addressed G7 leaders, as well as those of five partner countries invited to the Summit – Argentina, India, Indonesia, Senegal and South Africa – on major energy and climate issues.

Speaking in a session Monday under the theme “Investing in a better future: Climate, Energy, Health”, Dr Birol underscored that in addition to making the most of existing energy supply, the best answer to the current energy crisis is a huge and rapid scaling up of investment in energy efficiency, renewables and other clean energy technologies.

“The world does not need to choose between solving the energy security crisis and the climate crisis – we have the technologies and the policies to solve both at once,” Dr Birol said during the discussions with the G7 and partner country leaders alongside those of the European Union and several international organisations.

The G7 leaders highlighted the IEA’s key role in safeguarding energy security in their communiqué from the Summit.

“We are concerned about the burden of energy price increases and energy market instability, which aggravate inequalities nationally and internationally and threaten our shared prosperity,” they said. “In coordination with the IEA, we will explore additional measures to reduce price surges and prevent further impacts on our economies and societies, in the G7 and globally.”

Over the course of the Summit, Dr Birol met bilaterally with many of the leaders in attendance, including Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada, President Ursula von der Leyen of the European Commission, President Emmanuel Macron of France, Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India, President Joko Widodo of Indonesia, President Macky Sall of Senegal, Prime Minister Boris Johnson of the United Kingdom and President Joe Biden of the United States.

In their communiqué, the G7 leaders thanked Dr Birol and the heads of the other participating international organisations for their “valuable contributions”. And they issued a separate statement announcing plans to establish a new Climate Club initiative “to support the effective implementation of the Paris Agreement by accelerating climate action and increasing ambition, with a particular focus on the industry sector”. The leaders asked the IEA, the OECD, the IMF, the World Bank and the WTO to support this process “in line with their relevant expertise”.

The IEA has made significant contributions to the G7’s energy security and climate change priorities in recent years. The communiqué from last month’s meeting of G7 Climate, Energy and Environment Ministers recognised multiple aspects of the IEA’s work, including a recent major report on how to put carbon dioxide emissions from heavy industries such as steel and cement on a path towards net zero.
Global energy investment is set to increase by 8% in 2022 to reach USD 2.4 trillion, with the anticipated rise coming mainly in clean energy, according to a new report by the International Energy Agency. Although encouraging, the growth investment is still far from enough to tackle the multiple dimensions of today’s energy crisis and pave the way towards a cleaner and more secure energy future.



The fastest growth in energy investment is coming from the power sector – mainly in renewables and grids – and from energy efficiency, according to the IEA’s World Energy Investment 2022 report. The rise in clean energy spending is not evenly spread, however, with most of it taking place in advanced economies and China. And in some markets, energy security concerns and high prices are prompting higher investment in fossil fuel supplies, most notably on coal.



“We cannot afford to ignore either today’s global energy crisis or the climate crisis, but the good news is that we do not need to choose between them – we can tackle both at the same time,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “A massive surge in investment to accelerate clean energy transitions is the only lasting solution. This kind of investment is rising, but we need a much faster increase to ease the pressure on consumers from high fossil fuel prices, make our energy systems more secure, and get the world on track to reach our climate goals.”



Clean energy investment grew by only 2% a year in the five years after the Paris Agreement was signed in 2015. But since 2020, the pace of growth has accelerated significantly to 12%. Spending has been underpinned by fiscal support from governments and aided by the rise of sustainable finance, especially in advanced economies. Renewables, grids and storage now account for more than 80% of total power sector investment. Spending on solar PV, batteries and electric vehicles is now growing at rates consistent with reaching global net zero emissions by 2050.

Tight supply chains are also playing a large part in the headline rise in investment, though. Almost half of the overall increase in spending is a reflection of higher costs, from labour and services to materials such as cement, steel and critical minerals. These challenges are deterring some energy companies from picking up their spending more quickly.

From a low base, there is rapid growth underway in spending on some emerging technologies, notably batteries, low emissions hydrogen, and carbon capture utilisation and storage. Investment in battery energy storage is expected to more than double to reach almost $20 billion in 2022.

However, despite some bright spots, such as solar in India, clean energy spending in emerging and developing economies (excluding China) remains stuck at 2015 levels, with no increase since the Paris Agreement was reached. Public funds to support sustainable recovery are scarce, policy frameworks are often weak, economic clouds are gathering, and borrowing costs are rising. All of this undercuts the economic attractiveness of capital-intensive clean technologies. Much more needs to be done, including by international development institutions, to boost these investment levels and bridge widening regional divergences in the pace of energy transition investment.

Another warning sign comes in the form of a 10% rise in investment in coal supply in 2021, led by emerging economies in Asia, with a similar increase likely in 2022. Although China has pledged to stop building coal-fired power plants abroad, a significant amount of new coal capacity is coming onto the Chinese domestic market.

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has pushed up energy prices for many consumers and businesses around the world, hurting households, industries and entire economies – most severely in the developing world where people can least afford it. Some of the immediate shortfalls in exports from Russia need to be met by production elsewhere, notably for natural gas, and new LNG infrastructure may also be required to facilitate the diversification of supply away from Russia. While oil and gas investment is up 10% from last year, it remains well below 2019 levels.

Overall, today’s oil and gas spending is caught between two visions of the future: it is too high for a pathway aligned with limiting global warming to 1.5 °C but not enough to satisfy rising demand in a scenario where governments stick with today’s policy settings and fail to deliver on their climate pledges.

Today’s high fossil fuel prices are generating pain for many economies but are also generating an unprecedented windfall for oil and gas producers. Global oil and gas sector income is set to jump to $4 trillion in 2022, more than twice its five-year average, with the bulk of it going to major oil and gas exporting states.

These windfalls gains provide a once-in-a-generation opportunity for oil and gas producing economies to fund the much needed transformation of their economies, and for major oil and gas companies to do more to diversify their spending. The share of spending by oil and gas companies on clean energy is rising slowly, with what progress there is driven mainly by the European majors and a handful of other companies. Overall, clean energy investment accounts for around 5% of oil and gas company capital expenditure worldwide, up from 1% in 2019.

Clean energy technologies require a host of critical minerals, and for the first time the World Energy Investment report includes a detailed review of investment trends for critical minerals. Higher and more diversified investment is needed to curb today’s price pressures and create more resilient clean energy supply chains. Worldwide exploration spending rose 30% in 2021, with the increase in the United States, Canada and Latin America offering the prospect of more diversified supply in the years ahead.
Today’s crippling spikes in energy prices underscore the urgency and the benefits for African countries of accelerating the scale up of cheaper and cleaner sources of energy, the IEA says in a new special report released today.

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has sent food, energy and other commodity prices soaring, increasing the strains on African economies already hard hit by the Covid-19 pandemic. The overlapping crises are affecting many parts of Africa’s energy systems, including reversing positive trends in improving access to modern energy, with 25 million more people in Africa living without electricity today compared with before the pandemic, according to the Africa Energy Outlook 2022.

At the same time, Africa is also already facing more severe effects from climate change than most other parts of the world – including massive droughts – despite bearing the least responsibility for the problem. Africa accounts for less than 3% of the world’s energy-related CO2 emissions to date and has the lowest emissions per capita of any region.

Despite these challenges, the report finds that the global clean energy transition holds new promise for Africa’s economic and social development, with solar, other renewables and emerging areas such as critical minerals and green hydrogen offering strong growth potential if managed well. Increased international ambitions for cutting emissions are helping set a new course for the global energy sector amid declining clean technology costs and shifting global investment patterns. African countries are poised to benefit from these trends and attract increasing flows of climate finance.

“Africa has had the raw end of the deal from the fossil fuel-based economy, receiving the smallest benefits and the biggest drawbacks, as underlined by the current energy crisis,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “The new global energy economy that is emerging offers a more hopeful future for Africa, with huge potential for solar and other renewables to power its development – and new industrial opportunities in critical minerals and green hydrogen.”

“The immediate and absolute priority for Africa and the international community is to bring modern and affordable energy to all Africans – and our new report shows this can be achieved by the end of this decade through annual investment of $25 billion, the same amount needed to build just one new LNG terminal a year,” Dr Birol added. “It is morally unacceptable that the ongoing injustice of energy poverty in Africa isn’t being resolved when it is so clearly well within our means to do so.”

The Africa Energy Outlook 2022 explores a Sustainable Africa Scenario in which all African energy-related development goals are achieved on time and in full. This includes universal access to modern energy services by 2030 and the full implementation of all African climate pledges.

With demand for energy services in Africa set to grow rapidly, ensuring affordability is an urgent priority. Increased energy efficiency is essential for this, since it reduces fuel imports, eases strains on existing infrastructure and keeps consumer bills affordable.

Expanded and improved electricity grids provide the backbone of Africa’s new energy systems in this scenario, and are powered increasingly by renewables. Africa is home to 60% of the best solar resources worldwide, but it currently holds only 1% of solar PV capacity. Already the cheapest source of power in many parts of Africa, solar is set to outcompete all other sources continent-wide by 2030. Renewables – including solar, wind, hydropower and geothermal – account for over 80% of new power generation capacity added by 2030 in the Sustainable Africa Scenario.

While renewables are the driving force for Africa’s electricity sector this decade, the continent’s industrialisation relies in part on expanding natural gas use. More than 5 000 billion cubic metres (bcm) of natural gas resources have been discovered to date in Africa that have not yet been approved for development. These resources could provide an additional 90 bcm of gas a year by 2030, which may well be vital for Africa’s domestic fertiliser, steel, cement and water desalination industries. Cumulative CO2 emissions from the use of these gas resources over the next 30 years would be around 10 billion tonnes. If these emissions were added to Africa’s cumulative total today, they would bring its share of global emissions to a mere 3.5%.

Africa’s vast resources of minerals that are critical for multiple clean energy technologies are set to create new export markets but need to be managed well, with Africa’s revenues from critical mineral exports set to more than double by 2030.

A number of low-carbon hydrogen projects are underway, focused primarily on producing ammonia for fertilisers, which would strengthen Africa’s food security. Africa has huge potential to produce hydrogen using its rich renewable resources. As much as today’s energy demand could be produced at internationally competitive price points by 2030.

Achieving Africa’s energy and climate goals means more than doubling energy investment this decade. This would take it over USD 190 billion each year from 2026 to 2030, with two-thirds going to clean energy.

“Multilateral development banks must take urgent action to increase financial flows to Africa for both developing its energy sector and adapting to climate change,” said Dr Birol. “The continent’s energy future requires stronger efforts on the ground that are backed by global support. The COP27 Climate Change Conference in Egypt in late 2022 provides a crucial platform for African leaders to set the agenda for the coming years. This decade is critical not only for global climate action but also for the foundational investments that will allow Africa – home to the world’s youngest population – to flourish in the decades to come.”
Dr Hoffmann has been Deputy Permanent Secretary at the Danish Ministry since April 2017 and has been deeply involved in a number of key IEA initiatives, including the recent 7th Annual Global Conference on Energy Efficiency and the Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions. He previously served as Deputy Director General of the Danish Business Authority.

Dr Hoffmann takes over from Ambassador Hiroshi Oe of Japan, an experienced diplomat who had held the role of Governing Board Chair since February 2019. Since February 2020, Ambassador Hiroshi Oe has also been serving as Japan’s Ambassador to Italy.

“I am extremely pleased to welcome Dr Hoffmann as the new Chair of our Governing Board,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “The entire IEA Family is grateful to have him in this leadership position at such a pivotal moment for global energy markets and the clean energy transition. I would also like to thank Ambassador Oe for his able stewardship over the past three and a half years, during which the Agency had to deal with the energy market impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.”

As Governing Board Chair, Dr Hoffmann will play a vital role in guiding the work the IEA is currently undertaking to respond to the current crisis in energy markets and in putting into action the new mandates that member governments agreed on for the IEA at the Agency’s 2022 Ministerial Meeting in March, which launched the most significant expansion of the IEA’s mission since its creation in 1974.

“I am honoured to be entrusted with such an important responsibility,” Dr Hoffmann said. “I am looking very much forward to working closely with Executive Director Fatih Birol, the rest of the highly qualified IEA employees and the members of the IEA Governing Board. Together, we will deliver on the mandates entrusted to us by the Ministerial Meeting this year.”
The Governing Board of the International Energy Agency has agreed that Ukraine will join the IEA Family as an Association country, reflecting the IEA’s full support for Ukraine against Russia’s aggression, highlighting Ukraine’s critical role for energy security and supporting its reconstruction efforts. Recognising the exceptional and unprecedented circumstances the country is facing, the Governing Board also agreed to develop an action plan with Ukraine to address its energy security, energy transition and reconstruction efforts.

Ukraine’s Minister of Energy, German Galushchenko, who joined representatives of IEA member countries for the Paris Governing Board meeting via video conference from Kyiv, requested Ukraine’s entry into the IEA and described his country’s security and energy challenges.

The IEA’s Member Countries unanimously supported Ukraine joining the IEA family, which will strengthen the current ties with the IEA, bolster energy security and help Ukraine on its path to reconstruction.

Ukraine’s entry is set to be marked at an event in Warsaw hosted by Poland’s Minister of Climate and Environment Anna Moskwa, who was in Paris yesterday for the IEA Governing Board meeting.

“Given these exceptional circumstances, I am extremely pleased that the Governing Board has come together so quickly to show our support and solidarity with Ukraine, which is a key country for regional and global energy security and a leader in the energy transition,” said Ambassador Hiroshi Oe, the Chair of the IEA’s Governing Board.

“Since the invasion of Ukraine by Russia began on February 24, the IEA has been working to support Ukraine as well as all IEA family members in the face of changing energy markets,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “When the situation allows, Ukraine will need to rebuild its energy sector, ensuring diverse, ample and affordable energy supplies, while also further building on the progress it has already made in its energy transition. The IEA is ready to provide policy support and capacity building in a range of vital energy areas, including Ukraine’s gas strategy, demand-side management, renewables and energy efficiency.”



The IEA has a long history of cooperation with Ukraine – a country that is central to both European and global energy security. In the last 15 years, the IEA has conducted four in-depth policy reviews and organised policy events and energy data capacity building in Kyiv and Odesa. The Agency has worked closely with Ukraine through the European Commission’s EU4Energy programme. The IEA also recently completed a roadmap looking at how Ukraine can harness energy demand restraint, a topic that had been a priority for the government.

The IEA’s Association framework allows the IEA to work closely and deepen cooperation with its partner countries, sharing analysis, data and best practices. Ukraine is becoming the IEA’s 11th Association country. The framework was established in 2015 and other Association countries are Argentina, Brazil, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Morocco, Singapore, South Africa and Thailand. IEA family members now represent some 75% of global energy demand.




Global energy and climate leaders meeting at the IEA’s Global Conference on Energy Efficiency have agreed on actions to accelerate improvements in energy efficiency that can reduce energy bills, ease dependence on imported fuels and speed up reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.

At the end of the three-day Global Conference in Sønderborg, Denmark, on 7-9 June, ministers and other senior representatives from 24 countries – including France, Germany, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Senegal and the United States – and the African and European Unions issued a joint statement stressing the importance of energy efficiency for addressing many of today’s critical challenges, including the energy crisis, inflationary pressures and rising greenhouse gas emissions.

“Energy efficiency and demand side action have a particularly important role to play now as global energy prices are high and volatile, hurting households, industries and entire economies,” the joint statement said. “Energy efficiency offers immediate opportunities to reduce energy costs and reduce reliance on imported fuels.” The statement also welcomed “the new IEA research highlighting the significant environmental, economic and social benefits of early action on energy efficiency.”

The governments said they intended “to continue to seek opportunities for exchange and collaboration towards better policy making and implementation of energy efficiency actions.” They asked the IEA “to continue to facilitate and support these actions” and called on “all governments, industry, enterprises and stakeholders to strengthen their action on energy efficiency.”

IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol said: “The IEA started the Global Conference on Energy Efficiency seven years ago in order to drive a high-level worldwide discussion on an area that we saw was not getting the policy attention it deserved. This week’s conference has shown the value of these efforts, not just in bringing together energy and climate leaders from around the world – but also in increasing ambition and action on efficiency to help tackle the global energy crisis. I believe we will look back at this conference as a key moment for bolstering international progress on energy efficiency, resulting in reduced energy bills for citizens, enhanced energy security for countries and lower emissions for our planet.”

The Global Conference was co-hosted by Denmark’s Minister of Climate, Energy and Utilities Dan Jørgensen, who said: “This is a global recognition of energy efficiency and its importance for our climate as well as our push for energy independence. If we work together, share our knowledge and showcase our different technologies, as we have shown ours here in Denmark, we can increase our global efforts for energy efficiency.”

Ministers in attendance included those from Denmark, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland, New Zealand, Nigeria, Panama, Senegal, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Participants also included the African Union Commissioner for Infrastructure and Energy Amani Abou-Zeid and European Commissioner for Energy Kadri Simson. Ukrainian Energy Minister Herman Halushchenko addressed the Conference live via video link.

Over the three days, participants discussed issues such as buildings of the future, the role of consumer behaviour, and how to unlock financing for efficiency measures. The final day today included a unique closed-door session where Ministers shared best practices on how to put intentions into action.

According to the new IEA analysis, doubling the current global rate of energy intensity improvement to 4% a year has the potential to avoid 95 exajoules a year of final energy consumption by the end of this decade compared with a pathway based on today’s policy settings. This is equivalent to the current annual energy use of China. That level of savings would reduce global CO2 emissions by an additional 5 billion tonnes a year by 2030, about a third of the total emissions reduction efforts needed this decade to move the world onto a pathway to net zero emissions by mid-century, as laid out in the Net Zero Roadmap the IEA published last year.

These extra efforts on efficiency and related areas would cut global spending on energy. For example, households alone could save at least USD 650 billion a year on energy bills by the end of the decade compared with what they would have spent in a pathway based on today’s policies. The quantity of natural gas the world would avoid using is equal to four times what Europe imported from Russia last year, while the reduced oil consumption would be almost 30 million barrels of oil per day, about triple Russia’s average production in 2021. This global efficiency effort would help create 10 million additional jobs in fields ranging from building retrofits to manufacturing and transport infrastructure.



The new IEA analysis shows the significant opportunities for rapid energy efficiency gains in all sectors of the global economy. Most of these opportunities involve readily available technologies and would fully pay for themselves through lower running costs, especially at today’s steep energy prices. By 2030, around a third of the avoided energy demand comes from deploying more efficient equipment, ranging from air conditioners to cars. About a fifth comes from electrification, such as switching to heat pumps or electric cars. Digitalisation and use of more efficient materials in industry provide much of the rest.
Global energy and climate leaders are gathering in Denmark for a major ministerial meeting that could drive urgently needed improvements in energy efficiency, with new analysis by the International Energy Agency showing that stronger efficiency measures can reduce energy bills, fuel imports and greenhouse gas emissions quickly and significantly.

The IEA’s 7th Annual Global Conference on Energy Efficiency in Sønderborg, Denmark, from June 7-9, is bringing together more than 20 Ministers from countries around the world including Denmark, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland, New Zealand, Nigeria, Panama, Senegal, Sweden and the United Kingdom – as well as African Union Commissioner for Infrastructure and Energy Amani Abou-Zeid and European Commissioner for Energy Kadri Simson. Ukrainian Energy Minister Herman Halushchenko will address the Conference live via video link. Decision-makers from industry, finance, international organisations and civil society will also participate in the discussions.

With the world contending with its biggest energy crisis since the 1970s, the focus of the Global Conference is on how to implement measures quickly to reduce energy use, with the aim of easing cost pressures on consumers, cutting reliance on fuel imports and driving progress towards climate goals – while supporting job creation and economic growth. The new IEA analysis, published to coincide with the Global Conference, underscores the vital role of energy efficiency and energy saving in meeting today’s crises by immediately addressing the crippling impacts of the spike in energy prices, strengthening energy security and tackling climate change.

IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol said: “Energy efficiency is a critical solution to so many of the world’s most urgent challenges – it can simultaneously make our energy supplies more affordable, more secure and more sustainable. But inexplicably, government and business leaders are failing to sufficiently act on this. The oil shocks of the 1970s set in motion major advances in efficiency, and it is utterly essential that efficiency is at the heart of the response to today’s global energy crisis. The leaders meeting at the IEA Global Conference on Energy Efficiency need to make this the moment when the world hits the accelerator on efficiency – or we may fail to respond to the current energy crisis properly and pay the price for years to come.”

This year’s Global Conference is jointly organised by the IEA and Denmark’s Ministry of Climate, Energy and Utilities, with support from Danish engineering company Danfoss.

Denmark’s Minister of Climate, Energy and Utilities Dan Jørgensen said: “It’s no longer a question of whether we should implement more energy efficient solutions and technologies globally – it’s a question of how we are going to do that. By increasing our energy efficiency, we can reduce our dependence of Russian oil and gas completely and move closer to achieving climate neutrality. The conference in Sønderborg and the gathering of energy and climate leaders from various sectors and all parts of the world is an important step in the right direction.”

Danfoss President and CEO Kim Fausing said: “If the world is to meet climate goals to limit global warming, energy efficiency measures must be prioritized. A third of the reduction needed in CO2 emissions this decade according to the IEA net zero scenario must come from improvements in energy efficiency. The good news is that the solutions are there to improve energy efficiency in all sectors. We don’t need to wait. We need action because the greenest energy is the energy we don’t use.”

On the main conference day on June 8, leaders in industry, government and civil society are discussing issues such as buildings of the future, the role of consumer behaviour, and how to unlock financing for efficiency measures. The following day will include a unique closed-door session where Ministers from around the world will share best practices on how to accelerate progress. The town of Sønderborg will also host a number of technological showcases for the leaders to visit.

According to the new IEA analysis, doubling the current global rate of energy intensity improvement to 4% a year has the potential to avoid 95 exajoules a year of final energy consumption by the end of this decade compared with a pathway based on today’s policy settings. This is equivalent to the current annual energy use of China. That level of savings would reduce global CO2 emissions by an additional 5 billion tonnes a year by 2030, about a third of the total emissions reduction efforts needed this decade to move the world onto a pathway to net zero emissions by mid-century, as laid out in the Net Zero Roadmap the IEA published last year.

These extra efficiency efforts would cut global spending on energy. For example, households alone could save as much as USD 650 billion a year on energy bills by the end of the decade compared with what they would have spent in a pathway based on today’s policy settings. The amount of natural gas that the world would avoid using as a result of this would be equal to four times what the European Union imported from Russia last year, while the reduced oil consumption would be almost 30 million barrels of oil per day, about triple Russia’s average production in 2021. Compared to today, this global push on efficiency would help create 10 million additional jobs in fields ranging from building retrofits to manufacturing and transport infrastructure.



The new IEA analysis shows the significant opportunities for rapid energy efficiency gains in all sectors of the global economy. Most of these opportunities involve readily available technologies and would fully pay for themselves through lower running costs, especially at today’s high energy prices. By 2030, around a third of the avoided energy demand comes from deploying more efficient equipment, ranging from air conditioners to cars. About a fifth comes from electrification, such as switching to heat pumps or electric cars. Digitalisation and use of more efficient materials in industry provide much of the rest.

The new analysis complements the insights on the critical role of energy efficiency and energy saving measures in addressing today’s global energy crisis that were highlighted by the IEA’s recent 10-Point Plan to Reduce the European Union’s Reliance on Russian Natural Gas and 10-Point Plan to Cut Oil Use, as well as Playing my part: How to save money, reduce reliance on Russian energy, support Ukraine and help the planet, which was developed in cooperation with the European Commission.
Access to electricity. The share of the world’s population with access to electricity rose from 83% in 2010 to 91% in 2020, increasing the number of people with access by 1.3 billion globally. The number without access declined from 1.2 billion people in 2010 to 733 million in 2020. However, the pace of progress in electrification has slowed in recent years which may be explained by the increasing complexity of reaching more remote and poorer unserved populations and the unprecedented impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. Meeting the 2030 target requires increasing the number of new connections to 100 million a year. At current rates of progress, the world will reach only 92% electrification by 2030.

Between 2010 and 2020, every region of the world showed consistent progress in electrification, but with wide disparities. Electricity access in Sub-Saharan Africa rose from 46% in 2018 to 48% in 2020, but the region’s share of the global access deficit rose from 71% in 2018 to 77% in 2020, whereas most other regions, including Central and Southern Asia, saw declines in their share of the access deficits. Sub-Saharan Africa accounted for more than three-quarters of the people (568 million people) who remained without access in 2020.

Clean cooking. The share of the global population with access to clean cooking fuels and technologies rose to 69% in 2020, an increase of 3 percentage points over last year. However, population growth outpaced much of the gains in access, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa. As a result, the total number of people lacking access to clean cooking has remained relatively stagnant for decades. Between 2000 and 2010, this number was close to three billion people, or one-third of the global population. It dropped to around 2.4 billion in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by advancements in access in large, populous countries in Asia. In contrast, the access deficit in Sub-Saharan Africa has nearly doubled since 1990, reaching a total of around 923 million people in 2020.

A multisectoral, coordinated effort is needed to achieve the SDG 7 target of universal access to clean cooking by 2030. It is critical that the global community learns from the successes and challenges faced by countries that have attempted to design and implement clean household energy policies.

Renewables. Ensuring universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern energy implies accelerated deployment of renewable energy sources for electricity, heat, and transport. Although there is no quantitative target for SDG 7.2, custodian agencies agree that the share of renewable energy in total final energy consumption (TFEC) needs to rise significantly, even though renewable energy consumption did continue to grow through the pandemic, overcoming disruptions to economic activity and supply chains. While the share of renewable capacity expansion rose by a record amount in 2021, the positive global and regional trajectories mask the fact that countries where new capacity additions lagged were those most in need of increased access. Moreover, rising commodity, energy and shipping prices, as well as restrictive trade measures, have increased the cost of producing and transporting solar photovoltaic (PV) modules, wind turbines, and biofuels, adding uncertainty for future renewable energy projects. Renewable shares need to reach well over 30% of TFEC by 2030, up from 18% in 2019, to be on track for reaching net zero energy emissions by 2050. Achieving this objective would require strengthening policy support in all sectors and implementing effective tools to further mobilise private capital, especially in least-developed countries, landlocked developing countries, and small island developing countries.

Energy efficiency. SDG 7.3 aims to double the global rate of annual improvement in primary energy intensity – the amount of energy used per unit of wealth created – to 2.6% in 2010-30 versus 1990-2010. From 2010 to 2019, global annual improvements in energy intensity averaged around 1.9%, well below the target, and the average annual rate of improvement now has to reach 3.2% to make up for lost ground. This rate would need to be even higher – consistently over 4% for the rest of this decade – if the world is to reach net zero emissions from the energy sector by 2050, as envisioned in the IEA's Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario. Early estimates for 2020 point to a substantial decrease in intensity improvement because of the Covid-19 crisis, as a result of a higher share of energy-intensive activities in the economy and lower energy prices. The outlook for 2021 suggests a return to a 1.9% rate of improvement, the average rate during the previous decade, thanks to a sharper focus on energy efficiency policies, particularly in Covid-19 recovery packages. However, energy efficiency policies and investment need to be scaled up significantly to bring the SDG 7.3 target within reach.

International Financial Flows. International public financial flows to developing countries in support of clean energy decreased for the second year in a row, falling to USD 10.9 billion in 2019, despite the immense needs for sustainable development in most countries and growing urgency of climate change. The amount was down by nearly 24% from the previous year and may be worsened by the pandemic in 2020. Overall, the level of financing remains below what is needed to reach SDG 7, particularly in the most vulnerable and least developed countries.

The decrease was seen in most regions, with the only exception in Oceania, where international public flows rose by 72%. The bulk of decreases were concentrated in East and Southeast Asia, where they fell by 66.2%; Latin America and the Caribbean, where they dropped by 29.8%; and Central and South Asia, where they declined by 24.5%.

Although the private sector finances most renewable energy investments, public finance remains key to attract private capital, including for creating an enabling environment for private investments, developing the needed infrastructure, and addressing perceived and real risks and barriers for investments in the energy transition. International public flows to countries that lack the financial resources to support their energy transitions constitute a large part of the international collaboration that will be needed for a global energy transition that would bring the world closer to achieving all SDGs.

Indicators and data for tracking progress. Tracking global progress for SDG 7 targets requires high-quality, reliable and comparable data for informed and effective policymaking at the global, regional, and country levels. The quality of data has been improving through national and international cooperation and solid statistical capacity. National data systems improve as countries establish legal frameworks and institutional arrangements for comprehensive data collection for energy supply and demand balances; implement end-user surveys (e.g., households, businesses, etc.); and develop quality-assurance frameworks. However, after the pandemic hit and disrupted the rate of progress toward SDG 7, more investment in quality statistics is needed to know where we stand and how to get back on track. This is especially important for developing countries, particularly Least Developed Countries, to inform their national energy policies and strategies to ensure no one is left behind.
Ministers of the G7 group of advanced economies today recognised multiple aspects of the IEA’s work on the clean energy transition and energy security, including a recent major report on how to put carbon dioxide emissions from heavy industries such as steel and cement on a path towards net zero.

After a two-day meeting in Berlin under Germany’s 2022 Presidency of the G7, Climate, Energy and Environment Ministers issued a communiqué setting out a wide range of actions to tackle “the triple global crisis of climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution” while condemning Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and warning of its consequences.

The IEA’s analysis and activities were cited throughout the communiqué, spanning many key areas including efforts to improve energy efficiency, the need for increased investment in renewables, tracking of methane emissions, ensuring sufficient critical mineral supplies for clean energy technologies, and the IEA’s “timely” 10-Point Plan to Reduce the European Union’s Reliance on Russian Natural Gas and 10-Point Plan to Cut Oil Use, which were produced in response to the energy market impacts of Russia’s invasion.

Notably, the G7 Ministers committed to the goal of achieving predominantly decarbonised electricity sectors by 2035, as mapped out in an IEA report on the topic last October.

Today’s communiqué devoted particular attention the IEA’s recent report on Achieving Net Zero Heavy Industry Sectors in G7 Members, which was produced at the request of Germany’s G7 Presidency. The report lays out a series of recommendations for G7 economies to advance the transition towards near zero emission steel and cement production, building on the IEA’s landmark 2021 report Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector.

“We welcome the report by the International Energy Agency on ‘Achieving Net Zero Heavy Industry Sectors in G7 Members’, especially its recommendations regarding the suitable policies and financing mechanisms on the pathway to near zero industry production and the suggested principles of common and practicable definitions of near-zero-emission materials production,” the Ministers said in the communiqué. The Ministerial meeting was led by Germany’s Federal Minister for Economic Affairs and Climate Protection Robert Habeck and Federal Minister for the Environment and Consumer Protection Steffi Lemke.

IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol addressed the G7 Ministers twice yesterday. His first presentation concerned the situation regarding global energy markets, the energy security challenges exacerbated by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and the state of the clean energy transition. His second took place in a special session devoted to the decarbonisation of heavy industries, which was focused around the analysis in the recent IEA report.

“I’m delighted by the close collaboration between the IEA and Germany's G7 Presidency under Minister Robert Habeck on how to meet the global challenge of bringing emissions from heavy industries to net zero,” said Dr Birol. “Our new report, and the G7’s backing of its recommendations, provides vital foundations for future international action.”

The IEA’s heavy industry work also significantly informed an annex to the G7 Ministerial communiqué on the Industrial Decarbonisation Agenda.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol met with leaders from government, industry, finance and civil society at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, this week where he highlighted the need for greater investments in the clean energy transition to address the major global challenges of energy security and climate change.

“The world does not need to choose between the energy crisis and the climate crisis. We can solve both of them with the right investment,” Dr Birol said during a livestreamed dialogue on 23 May with leading government and industry figures including Germany’s Federal Minister for Economic Affairs and Climate Action Robert Habeck and India’s Minister for Petroleum and Natural Gas Hardeep Singh Puri. Dr Birol urged decision makers “not to lock in our future by using the current situation as an excuse” to justify investments in large, long-term fossil fuel projects that are inconsistent with efforts to reduce global emissions to net zero.

He further underlined the importance of accelerating investments in the clean energy transition, especially in emerging and developing economies, at a press conference on 24 May where he spoke alongside European Commission Executive Vice President Frans Timmermans, US Special Presidential Climate Envoy John Kerry and Engie CEO Catherine MacGregor about how to reach international climate goals while addressing energy security challenges.

Over the course of the World Economic Forum, Dr Birol delivered keynote speeches and other remarks at several high-profile sessions on topics such as energy security, energy transitions in emerging and developing economies, resilience and sustainable growth, the outlook for energy demand, energy utilities, and achieving net zero in heavy industries.

He also held bilateral meetings with a wide range of leaders including President Iván Duque of Colombia, Prime Minister Masrour Barzani of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, China’s Special Envoy on Climate Change Xie Zhenhua, Egypt’s Minister of Petroleum & Mineral Resources Tarek El Molla, Indian Petroleum Minister Puri, India’s Minister of Commerce & Industry Piyush Goyal, Indonesia's Coordinating Minister of Economic Affairs Airlangga Hartarto, Singapore's Minister for Transport S Iswaran, COP26 President Alok Sharma, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development President Odile Renaud-Basso and many others.
The European Commission and the International Energy Agency are joining forces to help EU countries reduce their reliance on Russian fossil fuels.

By strengthening investments in clean energy and energy efficiency, the project aims to mitigate the impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on the EU energy sector.

In the framework of this common endeavour, the Commission is offering support to Member States to reduce their dependence on Russian fossil fuels through the Technical Support Instrument. 17 EU countries have already joined the project. This support is in line with the REPowerEU Plan presented by the Commission on 18 May, outlining how to phase out EU dependence on Russian fossil fuels and accelerate the clean energy transition.

The cooperation with the IEA will cover seven areas: supply and diversification of liquefied natural gas; production of biomethane; stepping up international trade in hydrogen; acceleration of rooftop solar and heat pumps roll-out; demand-side measures and energy efficiency; faster permitting of renewable projects; innovative hydrogen and renewables solutions for industry.

It will include workshops, meetings, analysis, and data tracking by the International Energy Agency.

The first workshop, on 24 May, focused on supporting the uptake of demand-side and energy efficiency measures. The workshop was attended by representatives of the Member States participating in the project, the Commission, IEA and by industry stakeholders.

Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director, said: “The sense of determination across Europe to move rapidly away from Russian fossil fuels is impressive and inspiring. Clean energy technologies offer the best solutions to deal with the energy affordability and security crises we are witnessing today while also making progress in the fight against climate change. The IEA is very pleased to be working with the European Commission and EU Member States to help them accelerate the shift to a more secure and sustainable energy future.”

Mario Nava, Director-General for Structural Reform Support, said: “Meeting the target of cutting our energy reliance on third countries’ fossil fuels requires to mobilise all available means. Member States can rely on the Commission’s help through the Technical Support instrument and we are very pleased to work with a knowledgeable partner such as the International Energy Agency to reach that important goal.”

Ditte Juul-Jørgensen, Director-General for Energy, said: “The recently adopted REPowerEU plan brings actions and resources to shed EU dependence on Russian fossil fuel imports as quickly as possible, by advancing our clean energy transition and becoming more efficient in the way we consume energy, boosting our European Green Deal efforts. Supported by investments and reforms, we have a robust roadmap to follow. Member States’ engagement, solidarity and cooperation are crucial in the process.”
Electric car sales powered through 2021 and have remained strong so far in 2022, but ensuring future growth will demand greater efforts to diversify battery manufacturing and critical mineral supplies to reduce the risks of bottlenecks and price rises, according to the International Energy Agency.

Sales of electric cars (including fully electric and plug-in hybrids) doubled in 2021 to a new record of 6.6 million, with more now sold each week than in the whole of 2012, according to the latest edition of the annual Global Electric Vehicle Outlook. Despite strains along global supply chains, sales kept rising strongly into 2022, with 2 million electric cars sold worldwide in the first quarter, up by three-quarters from the same period a year earlier. The number of electric cars on the world’s roads by the end of 2021 was about 16.5 million, triple the amount in 2018.

In China, electric car sales nearly tripled in 2021 to 3.3 million, accounting for about half of the global total. Sales also grew strongly in Europe (increasing by 65% to 2.3 million) and the United States (more than doubling to 630 000). Chinese electric cars are typically smaller than in other markets. Alongside lower manufacturing costs, this has significantly reduced the price gap with traditional cars. The median price of an electric car in China was only 10% more than that of conventional offerings, compared with 45% to 50% on average in other major markets. By contrast, electric car sales are lagging in most emerging and developing economies where only a few models are often available and at prices that are unaffordable for mass-market consumers.

Sustained policy support has been one of the main reasons for strong electric car sales in many markets, with overall public spending on subsidies and incentives doubling in 2021 to nearly USD 30 billion. A growing number of countries have ambitious vehicle electrification targets for the coming decades, and many carmakers have plans to electrify their fleets that go beyond policy targets. Five times more electric car models were available globally in 2021 than in 2015, and the number of available models reached 450 by the end of 2021.

“Few areas of the new global energy economy are as dynamic as electric vehicles. The success of the sector in setting new sales records is extremely encouraging, but there is no room for complacency,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “Policy makers, industry executives and investors need to be highly vigilant and resourceful in order to reduce the risks of supply disruptions and ensure sustainable supplies of critical minerals. Under its new Ministerial mandate, the IEA is working with governments around the world on how to strategically manage resources of critical minerals that are needed for electric vehicles and other key clean energy technologies.”

In the short term, the greatest obstacles to continued strong EV sales are soaring prices for some critical minerals essential for battery manufacturing, as well as supply chain disruptions caused by Russia’s attack on Ukraine and by continued Covid-19 lockdowns in some parts of China. In the longer term, greater efforts are needed to roll out enough charging infrastructure to service the expected growth in electric car sales, the report says.

Prices for lithium, a crucial mineral for car batteries, were over seven times higher in May 2022 than at the start of 2021, and prices for cobalt and nickel also rose. All else being equal, the cost of battery packs could increase by 15% if these prices stay around current levels, which would reverse several years of declines. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has created further pressures, since Russia supplies 20% of global battery-grade nickel.

Governments in Europe and in the United States have promoted industrial policies aimed at domestic development of EV supply chains, as more than half of all lithium, cobalt and graphite processing and refining capacity is located in China. In addition, China produces three-quarters of all lithium-ion batteries and has 70% of the production capacity for cathodes and 85% for anodes, both of which are essential components of batteries. More than half of all electric cars in 2021 were assembled in China, and the country is poised to maintain its manufacturing dominance.

While nearly 10% of all cars sold worldwide in 2021 were electric, the figure for global truck sales was just 0.3%. This share would need to increase to around 10% by 2030 in a scenario aligned with the climate pledges and targets announced to date by countries worldwide – and to 25% by 2030 in the IEA’s Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario. Electric trucks have so far been substantially deployed only in China, thanks to strong government support. But other countries have announced plans for heavy truck electrification, and manufacturers are widening their choice of models. Long-range trucks require high-power charges that are currently expensive and often require grid upgrades. The new IEA report recommends greater government support and planning for public charging infrastructure.

Other recommendations include using stringent vehicle efficiency and carbon dioxide emission standards to underpin demand for EVs; prioritising two- and three-wheelers and urban buses to kick-start EVs in emerging and developing markets; and promoting more investment in critical mineral extraction while respecting environmentally and socially sustainable practices to ensure sufficient supplies to power the clean energy transition.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol received a visit from Mohammad Sanusi Barkindo, the Secretary General of OPEC, at the IEA headquarters in Paris today.

During the meeting, Dr Birol thanked Mr Barkindo for his efforts in recent years to foster frank and open dialogue between energy producers and consumers in the interests of greater oil market stability. Those efforts have taken place over a period during which major shocks have shaken global markets, including the unprecedented drop in oil demand due to the Covid-19 pandemic and the disruptions to supply caused by the impacts of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

The discussion at the meeting covered the current situation in global energy markets, including supply and demand dynamics, and the implications for the global economy, particularly with regard to the impact on emerging and developing economies.

The IEA and OPEC have been enhancing their technical cooperation over recent years, including to ensure comparability across their respective outlooks and studies and through various joint workshops on specific topics of shared interest.
G7 economies are well placed to be first movers on driving down carbon dioxide emissions from heavy industry, setting out a path for the rest of the world for this essential part of the transition to clean energy systems, according to a new report from the International Energy Agency.



The report, Achieving Net Zero Heavy Industry Sectors in G7 Members, was requested by Germany under its 2022 Presidency of the G7 to inform policy makers, industrial leaders and other decision makers ahead of this month’s G7 Climate, Energy and Environment Ministers’ Meeting in Berlin and beyond. The report lays out a series of recommendations for G7 economies to advance the transition towards near zero emission steel and cement production, building on the IEA’s landmark report last year, Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector.



G7 members – Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States plus the European Union – account for around 40% of the global economy, 30% of energy demand and 25% of energy system CO2 emissions. Meanwhile, heavy industry’s direct CO2 emissions amount to around 6 billion tonnes per year, more than one-sixth of total CO2 emissions from the global energy system. Producers of steel and cement in particular face unique challenges to drastically reduce their emissions footprint. The G7’s economic heft, technology leadership and international alliances present it with a special role in leading the way and inspiring successful energy transitions in these crucial sectors, the new report says.



“There is no way to reach net zero without dramatic reductions in emissions from heavy industry, and G7 economies have both a responsibility and an opportunity to take a leadership role in driving that forward,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “Emissions from heavy industry are among the most stubborn, making it essential that countries with significant financial and technological resources use them to scale up practical solutions in a coordinated way. This new report sets out realistic and actionable steps for G7 members that can provide a catalyst for the global progress that is urgently needed.”

“To achieve our goal to limit the global temperature rise to 1.5 degrees, we have to decarbonise our industries. This decade is key to set the tracks to climate neutrality. Especially in sectors where emissions are high but hard-to-abate like steel and cement, we have to fundamentally shift production methods,” said Robert Habeck, Germany’s Federal Minister for Economic Affairs and Climate Action. “The IEA report Achieving Net Zero Heavy Industry Sectors in G7 Members shows us pathways and advances our understanding of the tools and definitions we need. It brings us a big step further to jointly create an international economic and political environment that incentivises investments in green and low carbon production facilities. We want the G7 to be a pioneer in this process.”



Heavy industry is responsible for more than 15% of coal use and about 10% of oil and gas use in G7 members. This makes the net zero transition in heavy industry an important pillar for reducing the reliance on fossil fuels in the G7 in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. However, many of the technologies for significantly reducing emissions from heavy industry are still at large prototype or demonstration stage, and competitive international markets for heavy industrial products often result in profit margins that are too thin to cover the higher up-front costs of integrating low emission processes.

The new IEA report sets out a toolbox that G7 members can draw upon and recommends that they set out ambitious long-term energy transition targets for heavy industry while supporting demonstration and early commercial projects through targeted finance and other risks mitigation measures. These supply-side efforts would also leverage essential private investment, it says.



On the demand side, the report recommends using carbon contracts for difference, public procurement rules, mandates, quotas and other related measures to create differentiated markets for steel and cement production with near zero emissions, which at least in the immediate future will be more expensive than materials made using legacy processes.



Importantly, the report also calls for G7 governments to adopt stable, absolute and ambitious thresholds for material production with near zero emissions. It proposes definitions and relevant thresholds for the G7 to adopt as a starting point that are compatible with a global pathway to net zero emissions by 2050.

G7 members should work with industry to establish agreed-upon thresholds, definitions and measurement standards for what constitutes steel and cement production with near zero emissions, according to the report. This is essential for establishing policy and production guidelines. Given the urgency of the transition, the report says that G7 economies need to set mechanisms to recognise the use of interim technologies that substantially reduce emissions but do not go far enough to be considered near zero emissions.
Southeast Asia’s reliance on fossil fuels to meet rising demand for energy is proving to be a significant vulnerability in today’s energy crisis. Meeting energy security and emissions goals will require countries in the region to make major efforts to improve energy efficiency, accelerate renewable power generation and switch to low emissions fuels, according to the International Energy Agency.

The 10 member economies of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) are among the world’s fastest growing. Their accelerated transition to sustainable energy would not only cut carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and fossil fuel imports, according to the IEA’s Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2022, but also speed up universal access to electricity and clean cooking for their citizens, as well as provide greater business opportunities in the emerging clean energy economy.

Based on today’s policy settings, energy demand in the region is set to grow by around 3% a year to 2030, with three-quarters of that increased demand being met by fossil fuels, according to the new report, the IEA’s fifth edition of the regional outlook. As a result, Southeast Asia’s CO2 emissions would grow 35% from 2020 levels. And without stronger policy action, its net oil import bill, which stood at USD 50 billion in 2020, is set to multiply in size rapidly if today’s high commodity prices endure.

“Southeast Asia is an emerging heavyweight of global energy, and the speed of its economic development makes it even more essential that the region’s governments hasten efforts to transition to sustainable energy and that they get the international support they need to do so,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “This report is a testament to the IEA’s strong and productive relationship with ASEAN’s dynamic members, and we stand ready to accompany them as they strive to provide clean, affordable and secure energy for all their citizens.”

ASEAN’s members are Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam. Several of them have announced ambitious targets for reaching carbon neutrality and curbing reliance on coal-fired power. The report notes that international support will be critical, especially to boost innovation and develop much needed infrastructure such as renewable power generation and grids, as well as facilities for low emissions fuels.

Total energy investment would need to reach USD 190 billion a year by 2030 to meet the region’s climate goals, up from around USD 70 billion a year between 2016 and 2020. While international development finance is essential, the report says ASEAN members could reduce financing costs and attract private investors by signalling their clear commitment to deploy low-carbon energy and by improving regulatory and financing frameworks.

Southeast Asia is set to play a major role in global energy transitions as a key supplier of critical minerals and manufacturer of clean energy products. Indonesia and the Philippines are the two largest nickel producers in the world; Indonesia and Myanmar are the second and third largest tin producers; Myanmar accounts for 13% of global rare earth production; and Southeast Asia provides 6% of the world’s bauxite. Meanwhile, Malaysia and Viet Nam are the world’s second and third largest manufacturers of solar PV modules, while Thailand is the 11th largest car manufacturer in the world and could become a key manufacturing hub for electric vehicles.

Investment in mineral exploration has declined in recent years, and the region’s share of the global mineral exploration budget has halved since 2012. This trend needs to reverse if Southeast Asia is to realise its potential in this growing sector.
Poland has made serious progress in improving the security and sustainability of its energy system in recent years. However, a major acceleration in its clean energy transition is needed to tackle the emissions resulting from coal’s dominant role in the power sector, according to the latest policy review by the International Energy Agency.

Poland aims to cut emissions through increased use of renewables and natural gas, the introduction of nuclear energy, greater electrification of energy demand and improved efficiency. Since the IEA’s last in-depth review in 2016, Poland has greatly diversified its gas supply and made impressive progress on renewables. It is now home to one of Europe’s fastest growing solar PV markets and plans to roll out an extensive array of offshore wind projects. However, fossil fuels still account for 85% of total energy supply, with coal holding the largest share. As a result, the carbon intensity of Poland’s energy sector is currently the second highest among IEA members.

Efforts over the past years to diversify natural gas supply should enable Poland to ride out disruptions in deliveries from Russia amid the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Russia’s share of Poland’s gas imports already fell from 90% in 2010 to 55% in 2020 thanks to investments in LNG terminals and pipeline links to other EU countries. Poland had already told Russia’s Gazprom it would not renew a long-term gas contract that expires in 2022. A new Baltic pipeline delivering Norwegian gas should be completed in 2022, with a capacity that exceeds pre-war imports from Russia. Poland is also significantly expanding both LNG capacity and pipeline interconnections with other EU countries.



“Poland has shown great foresight in cutting its reliance on Russian natural gas over recent years, putting itself in a relatively secure position today despite the difficult times we are living through,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol, who is presenting the report in Warsaw today with Polish Energy Minister Anna Moskwa. “Current events underscore the need for Poland to continue to accelerate its transition towards a more secure and cleaner energy system.”

Electricity from coal-fired generation surged during 2021’s economic rebound, wiping out in one year almost a decade of steady reductions and lifting coal back to 80% of total generation, the highest share among the IEA’s 31 members. A

Social Contract signed with the country’s mining unions in 2021 calls for ending most hard coal production, with compensation for affected regions and workers. However, the agreement allows hard coal mining to continue through 2049 and does not cover lignite, a major source of electricity and heating.



Poland continues to subsidise the coal industry, which provides employment in many regions of the country. The entrenched use of coal for electricity and heating presents a difficult starting point for efforts over the next decade, just as the country needs to update its energy and climate targets to match the European Union’s increased ambitions.



Poland has huge ambitions for renewables and is delivering in some areas. From 2010 to 2020, the amount of electricity generated from renewables almost tripled, with its share of the power mix increasing from 7% to 18% over that period. The growth was driven mainly by increased onshore wind generation and use of solid biomass, while solar PV grew tenfold.



Nuclear power is a critical part of Poland’s energy strategy, with plans to build the country’s first reactor by 2033 and for a total of six nuclear plants to cover an estimated 16% of generation by 2040. However, a sustained effort will be necessary for the full plan to be completed on schedule and within budget.



While natural gas can play a role in providing energy security as coal use is wound down, natural gas use will also have to be reduced over time for Poland to meet its long-term decarbonisation goals. Poland’s plans to reduce the role of coal in heating largely involves switching to gas, but the report finds a greater focus on heat pumps and building renovations would be more efficient in the long term and avoid the risk of burdening the country with stranded assets.



The policy review also recommends that Poland go further with its recent moves to liberalise domestic energy markets. State-controlled companies have dominant roles across Poland’s energy sector and prices are still regulated in some markets. While consumers have the right to change electrical suppliers, both household and business switching rates are well below the EU average.




New capacity for generating electricity from solar, wind and other renewables increased to a record level worldwide in 2021 and will grow further this year as governments increasingly seek to take advantage of renewables’ energy security and climate benefits, according to the International Energy Agency.

The world added a record 295 gigawatts of new renewable power capacity in 2021, overcoming supply chain challenges, construction delays and high raw material prices, according to the IEA’s latest Renewable Energy Market Update. Global capacity additions are expected to rise this year to 320 gigawatts – equivalent to an amount that would come close to meeting the entire electricity demand of Germany or matching the European Union’s total electricity generation from natural gas. Solar PV is on course to account for 60% of global renewable power growth in 2022, followed by wind and hydropower.

In the European Union, annual additions jumped by almost 30% to 36 gigawatts in 2021, finally exceeding the bloc’s previous record of 35 gigawatts set a decade ago. The additional renewables capacity commissioned for 2022 and 2023 has the potential to significantly reduce the European Union’s dependence on Russian gas in the power sector. However, the actual contribution will depend on the success of parallel energy efficiency measures to keep the region’s energy demand in check.

“Energy market developments in recent months – especially in Europe – have proven once again the essential role of renewables in improving energy security, in addition to their well-established effectiveness at reducing emissions,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “Cutting red tape, accelerating permitting and providing the right incentives for faster deployment of renewables are some of the most important actions governments can take to address today’s energy security and market challenges, while keeping alive the possibility of reaching our international climate goals.”

Renewables’ growth so far this year is much faster than initially expected, driven by strong policy support in China, the European Union and Latin America, which are more than compensating for slower than anticipated growth in the United States. The US outlook is clouded by uncertainty over new incentives for wind and solar and by trade actions against solar PV imports from China and Southeast Asia.

Based on today’s policy settings, however, renewable power’s global growth is set to lose momentum next year. In the absence of stronger policies, the amount of renewable power capacity added worldwide is expected to plateau in 2023, as continued progress for solar is offset by a 40% decline in hydropower expansion and little change in wind additions.

While energy markets face a wide range of uncertainties, the strengthened focus by governments on energy security and affordability – particularly in Europe – is building new momentum behind efforts to accelerate the deployment of energy efficiency solutions and renewable energy technologies. The outlook for renewables for 2023 and beyond will therefore depend to a large extent on whether new and stronger policies are introduced and implemented over the next six months.

The current growth in renewable power capacity would be even faster without the current supply chain and logistical challenges. The cost of installing solar PV and wind plants is expected to remain higher than pre-pandemic levels throughout 2022 and 2023 because of elevated commodity and freight prices, reversing a decade of declining costs. However, they remain competitive because prices for natural gas and other fossil fuel alternatives have risen much faster.

Global additions of solar PV capacity are on course to break new records in both this year and next, with the annual market reaching 200 GW in 2023. Solar’s growth in China and India is accelerating, driven by strong policy support for large-scale projects, which can be completed at lower costs than fossil fuel alternatives. In the European Union, rooftop solar installations by households and companies are expected to help consumers save money as electricity bills rise.

Policy uncertainties, as well as long and complex permitting regulations, are preventing much faster growth for the wind industry. Having plunged 32% in 2021 after exceptionally high installations in 2020, additions of new onshore wind capacity are expected to recover slightly this year and next.

New additions of offshore wind capacity are set to drop 40% globally in 2022 after having been buoyed last year by a huge jump in China as developers rushed to meet a subsidy deadline. But global additions are still on course to be over 80% higher this year than in 2020. Even with its slower expansion this year, China will surpass Europe at the end of 2022 to become the market with the largest total offshore wind capacity in the world.

Biofuel demand recovered in 2021 from its pandemic lows to reach more than 155 billion litres – near 2019 levels. Demand is expected to keep rising – by 5% in 2022 and 3% in 2023. However, the impacts of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine have contributed to a 20% downward revision of our previous forecast for biofuel growth in 2022. Since biofuels are blended with gasoline and diesel, much of the downward revision stems from slowing demand for transport, which has been depressed by a combination of factors including growing inflationary pressures, weaker global economic growth and Covid-related mobility restrictions in China.
King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden today led a high-level delegation of officials, academics and business leaders on a visit to the IEA’s headquarters in Paris where they discussed the emerging global energy crisis and the importance of clean energy technologies with IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol and other senior figures from the Agency.

The King’s visit was part of the Royal Technology Mission organised by the Swedish Sovereign and the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences. This year’s visit to France and Germany is on the theme of energy transitions and digitalisation, with a focus on the research and development of new technologies.

The 40-person delegation visiting the IEA was led jointly by the King and the Academy’s Chair, Marcus Wallenberg. It included Academy President Tuula Teeri, Ambassador to France Hakan Akesson, Vattenfall CEO Anna Borg, ABB Sweden CEO Dennis Helfridsson, Northvolt CEO Peter Carlsson, Polestar CEO Dennis Nobelius and Robert Andrén, Director General of the Swedish Energy Agency. The delegation also included the Vice-Chancellors of Linnaeus University and Umea University, and the President of Chalmers University of Technology.

After introductory remarks by Mr Wallenberg, Dr Birol delivered a speech on global energy markets, the clean energy transition, and the implications for economies, geopolitics and technology, which was followed by an open discussion. Sébastien Treyer, Executive Director of the Paris-based policy research institute IDDRI, then gave a presentation on French industrial policy, and Alain Bécoulet, Head of Engineering at the ITER project, spoke about nuclear fusion. After the larger discussion, King Carl XVI Gustaf, Mr Wallenberg and Dr Birol had a brief meeting during which Dr Birol thanked the King for awarding him Sweden’s Order of the Polar Star in 2013.

Sweden has been a member of the IEA since the Agency’s founding in 1974. The Swedish government’s recent involvement in key IEA activities includes chairing the 2017 IEA Ministerial Meeting.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol met today in Vienna with Austrian Federal Minister for Climate Action, Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation and Technology Leonore Gewessler to discuss the situation in European and global energy markets.

Their conversation covered efforts by Europe and particularly Austria to phase out Russian oil and natural gas supplies while at the same time strengthening energy security and working to achieve climate targets. They specifically discussed the recent decision by the Austrian government to phase out Russian gas by 2027, to boost domestic production of energy including biomethane, and to support more energy efficiency and greater deployment of renewables and green hydrogen.

The Executive Director and Minister Gewessler then held a joint press conference that was broadcast on Austrian television.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) today announced that a High-Level Advisory Group of global energy, climate and finance leaders, chaired by UN Special Envoy Michael R. Bloomberg, will provide strategic input for a forthcoming IEA special report that will explore how to put the world’s coal emissions on a path toward net zero amid the major energy security and affordability challenges that are affecting countries worldwide with particularly severe economic impacts in the developing world.

IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol convened the High-Level Advisory Group to offer recommendations for the major new IEA report – Coal in the Global Net Zero Transition: Strategies for Rapid, Secure and People-Centred Change – which is due to be published in the fourth quarter of 2022. The report will provide the first authoritative assessment of how to tackle one of the world’s biggest energy and climate challenges in the changed global landscape resulting from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The advisory group will be chaired by Michael R. Bloomberg, the UN Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Climate Ambition and Solutions and the Founder of Bloomberg LP and Bloomberg Philanthropies, and co-chaired by Arifin Tasrif, Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources of Indonesia, which currently holds the G20 Presidency, and Teresa Ribera Rodríguez, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for the Ecological Transition and the Demographic Challenge of Spain.

The group’s members will include Mafalda Duarte, CEO of the Climate Investment Funds; Patrick Graichen, Germany’s State Secretary for Economic Affairs and Climate Action; Aditya Mittal, CEO of Arcelor Mittal; Daniel Mminele, Head of South Africa’s Presidential Climate Finance Task Team; Gary Nagle, CEO of Glencore; Ahmed Saeed, Vice President of the Asian Development Bank; Kadri Simson, Commissioner for Energy of the European Union; Gurdeep Singh, Chairman and Managing Director of NTPC; Jonathan Wilkinson, Canada’s Minister of Natural Resources; and Zhang Lei, CEO of Envision Group. The group will meet twice prior to the publication of the report.

The emerging global energy crisis driven by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has laid bare the challenges that countries face in ensuring reliable, sustainable and affordable energy supplies in a complex and uncertain geopolitical environment. As well as hurting consumers and businesses around the world, especially in developing economies, the turmoil in global energy markets threatens to derail efforts to prevent the worst effects of climate change. Last year, global energy-related CO2 emissions rebounded to their highest level in history, largely because of record use of coal to generate electricity.

At the COP26 Climate Change Conference in Glasgow this past November, countries agreed to accelerate efforts to phase down unabated coal power as part of the Glasgow Climate Pact. The new IEA special report is part of the Agency’s work supporting the implementation of the agreements reached in Glasgow while taking into account the energy security and affordability challenges that have dramatically intensified since Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.

Managing the move away from coal will not be straightforward. Renewable energy options are the most cost-effective new sources of electricity generation in most markets, but there are still multiple challenges to reducing emissions from the existing global fleet of coal power plants while maintaining secure and affordable electricity supplies. Increased financial flows and new financing mechanisms will be essential to bring down coal emissions in electricity generation worldwide, and innovation in areas such as carbon capture will be key in many industrial sectors

Tackling the consequences of change for workers, communities and vulnerable consumers will also require dedicated and determined policy efforts. This is especially the case in developing economies where electricity demand is growing rapidly, coal is often the incumbent fuel for power generation, and unabated use of coal in the industrial sector is on the rise.

Many of these challenges have become even more acute in recent months amid the sharp increases in the prices of energy and other crucial commodities, such as cereals and other food staples, which have been driven to all-time highs by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. This is putting further strains on the already fragile financial situation in many developing economies. It also risks pushing energy sector transformation down the policy agenda in countries around the world.

“We are living through extremely difficult times – Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has shaken the global energy system and is fuelling a damaging and unnecessary cost-of-living crisis that is being felt most painfully by those who can afford it least, especially in developing economies,” said Fatih Birol, Executive Director of the IEA. “At the same time, we cannot lose sight of the climate crisis that, left unchecked, will bring even greater disruption and suffering. This is why our new report is critical: to provide practical steps to put coal emissions into decline towards net zero in a way that is fair for emerging and developing economies – and ensures secure and affordable energy for everyone. I’m very grateful to the distinguished members of this high-level group for agreeing to offer their valuable advice and insights from a range of different perspectives.”

“We need to move the world beyond coal-fired power plants as fast as possible, which requires ending the subsidies that prop them up and turbocharging the deployment of clean energy,” said Michael R. Bloomberg, UN Special Envoy for Climate Ambition and Solutions. “I look forward to working with the International Energy Agency to accelerate the reduction of harmful emissions – and to do it in ways that will strengthen economic growth and energy security.”

At COP26, Mr Bloomberg announced a new effort by Bloomberg Philanthropies to work with countries around the world to close a quarter of the world’s remaining coal plants and all proposed coal plants by 2025, including by advancing clean energy projects to replace them.

“It is critical that we share a common understanding on how we undertake coal transitions globally, in a way that not only reduces emissions but also puts the national contexts within just and equitable approaches to this process,” said Arifin Tasrif, Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources of Indonesia. “For this reason, I am honoured to co-chair this eminent Advisory Group convened by the IEA.”

“We shall accelerate the energy transition both for climate security and for security of supply. A fair and balanced energy transition means caring for coal mining and coal-fired power plants regions and workers, providing for alternatives and opportunities to transform their economies,” said Teresa Ribera, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for the Ecological Transition and the Demographic Challenge of Spain. "In Spain, we have cut down 90% of coal-fired power generation in just three years. Spain’s Just Transition Agreements – merging companies, trade unions and government – facilitate change of the energy model in coal regions, provide for new employment opportunities and create green industry.”

The special report will offer recommendations for how policy makers can achieve reductions in coal use without undermining economic growth and energy security, including measures to mobilise financing and address the social aspects of the transition. It will build on the major IEA reports Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector and Financing Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging and Developing Economies – and contribute to international efforts to put the Glasgow Climate Pact into action. It will also draw on the IEA’s recent analysis and recommendations in response to the energy crisis triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, including the 10-Point Plan to Reduce the European Union’s Reliance on Russian Natural Gas, 10-Point Plan to Cut Oil Use, and Playing my part: How to save money, reduce reliance on Russian energy, support Ukraine and help the planet.

As well as the strategic guidance provided by the High-Level Advisory Group, the special report will be reviewed by and reflect feedback from a range of relevant stakeholders from across government, industry, finance, academia and civil society.
IEA member countries agreed on 1 April to make an additional 120 million barrels (mb) available from their emergency oil stocks over a six month period. This collective action, which is the largest in IEA history, comes on top of the 62.7 mb release agreed in March.

As shown in the table below, of the total 182.7 mb being made available from the two decisions, roughly three-quarters is coming from public stocks (government-owned or by specialised agencies) and the remaining quarter from the lowering of national stockholding obligations set on industry. Nearly 50 mb of this is in the form of oil products; a partial breakdown of these products is shown in the table based on currently available information. Member countries began releasing emergency stocks in March, following the initial IEA decision. And based on the 1 April decision, they will be releasing volumes over the period through to October, according to the specific stockholding system and market needs in each country.
The International Energy Agency and the European Commission today outlined a range of simple steps that people can take to reduce their energy use and save money – and that would save enough oil to fill 120 super tankers and enough natural gas to heat almost 20 million homes if adopted by all EU citizens.

The actions – designed to help Ukraine by cutting Europe’s reliance on Russian fuel and also to reduce greenhouse gas emissions – were presented and discussed by IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol and European Commission Director-General for Energy Ditte Juul Jørgensen during a live-streamed virtual roundtable event today with a host of figures from government and civil society.



People across Europe have helped Ukraine by making donations or aiding refugees directly, and many would like to do more. Most households are also experiencing higher energy bills because of the energy crisis exacerbated by the war. Using less energy is not only an immediate way for Europeans to reduce their bills, it also supports Ukraine by reducing the need for Russian oil and gas, thereby helping to reduce the revenue streams funding the invasion.



The actions in the plan draw on the IEA’s recent 10-Point Plan to Reduce the European Union’s Reliance on Russian Natural Gas and 10-Point Plan to Cut Oil Use. The latest plan – Playing my part: How to save money, reduce reliance on Russian energy, support Ukraine and help the planet – shows how local and national governments can work with citizens to unlock even more savings. By following all recommendations in the plan, the typical EU household could save, on average, close to €500 a year, though the amounts would vary depending on the household’s size, location and access to public transport for example. If all EU citizens were to follow the recommendations at home and in their workplace, it would save 220 million barrels of oil a year and around 17 billion cubic metres of natural gas.

“Faced with the horrendous scenes of human suffering that we’ve seen following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, people in Europe want to take action,” said IEA Executive Director Dr Birol. “Using less energy is a concrete way to help the Ukrainian people – and to help ourselves. This guide has easy-to-follow steps that with little or no discomfort on our part can reduce the flow of money to Russia’s military and help put us on a path to a cleaner and more sustainable planet.”

“Energy efficiency has the potential to be the most important policy initiative for reducing our dependence on Russian imports and responding to the current energy market challenges, both through short term energy savings, and longer term energy efficiency measures,” said Ms Juul Jørgensen, the European Commission Director-General for Energy. “Energy efficiency is an area where everyone can make a difference. This also has the potential to provide considerable savings to individual consumers at this time of high wholesale energy prices.”

The recommended steps involve turning down heating and using less air conditioning, working from home when possible to avoid commuting, and car-pooling or travelling by public transport when available. Employers have a role to play to encourage teleworking and train journeys instead of short-haul flights. Governments can play a role by providing financial incentives by reducing fares for trains, buses and micro-mobility and by supporting the installation of solar panels, the improvement of home insulation and the switch to other fuels for heating.

According to the plan’s findings, turning down the thermostat by just 1 °C would save around 7% of the energy used for heating, while setting an air conditioner 1 °C warmer could reduce the amount of electricity used by up to 10%. With an average one-way car commute in the EU of 15 kilometres, working at home three days a week could reduce household fuel bills by around €35 a month, even after taking increased energy use at home into account. And as the average car in the EU clocks up about 13 000 kilometres a year, reducing cruising speed on motorways by 10 kilometres an hour could cut fuel bills by an average of around €60 a year.

Besides Dr Birol and Ms Jørgensen, the roundtable also included Leonore Gewessler, Federal Minister for Climate Action, Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation and Technology of Austria; Eamon Ryan, Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications of Ireland; Claude Turmes, Minister for Energy and Spatial Planning of Luxembourg; Patrick Graichen, State Secretary of the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action; Sharan Burrow, General Secretary of the International Trade Union Confederation; Monique Goyens, Director General of BEUC, the European Consumer Organisation; and Mark Watts, Executive Director of C40 Cities.
Despite notable success in expanding wind and other clean sources of power, Belgium still requires strong and sustained efforts to reduce its use of fossil fuels, cut carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and lower its reliance on energy imports, according to a new policy review by the International Energy Agency.

Since the IEA’s last in-depth review of Belgium’s energy policies in 2016, the country has become a major player in offshore wind. In 2021, Belgium had the sixth highest offshore wind capacity in the world, a major accomplishment given the country’s small and busy territorial waters. This output will continue to grow following recently announced steps to further accelerate and expand offshore wind deployment. Belgium is also working with other North Sea countries to develop a combined offshore electricity grid.



Belgium has also displayed a strong commitment to international cooperation, working with the Netherlands, Germany and France to ensure the security of natural gas supply as production is phased out at the Netherlands’ Groningen field, which once supplied around half of Belgium’s gas. Belgium is several years ahead of schedule on investments in its gas network that are needed to support the Groningen phase-out.

However, Belgium’s greenhouse emissions have declined only marginally in recent years. Though the government’s Long-term Strategy for Energy and Climate aims to put the country on a path aligned with the climate goals of the Paris Agreement and the European Union, it does not include a clear target for national climate neutrality by 2050. The IEA report recommends that Belgium should update its long-term strategy to include a clear commitment and path to 2050 climate neutrality.

“Belgium has shown leadership on clean energy transitions – not only through its impressive deployment of offshore wind power but also by punching well above its weight in international cooperation efforts,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “In the years ahead, an unwavering focus will be needed to drive a sharper decline in emissions, notably by shifting the country’s energy system towards a broad portfolio of clean, secure and affordable sources of energy.”



Belgium has so far made limited progress on reducing its reliance on fossil fuels, with government estimates suggesting demand may increase through 2030 at least. In 2020, oil accounted for 46% of total energy demand, followed by natural gas (27%), and a small share (3%) from coal. While renewables’ share has doubled in the past decade, they still only accounted for 13% of total energy demand in 2020. Besides wind, that growth was also driven by increased use of bioenergy for industry, heating and transport.



Belgium plans to phase out most nuclear electricity generation by 2025, raising concerns over its electricity security and greenhouse gas emissions. Nuclear has often accounted for almost half of annual electricity generation, and the phase-out is likely to lead to greater use of gas-fired generation and increased emissions. In light of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the Belgian federal government decided in March to take the necessary steps to extend 2 gigawatts of nuclear capacity by ten years and to introduce a EUR 1.2 billion package to accelerate energy transitions and protect consumers from high energy prices. These measures include plans to further accelerate and expand offshore wind deployment; incentives for solar panels, heat pumps and electric vehicles; and temporary reductions in excise duties and VAT for some energy products.

Belgium’s economy was badly hurt by the Covid-19 pandemic, with GDP contracting by more than 5% in 2020. More than half of Belgium’s EUR 5.9 billion economic recovery plan contributes to the country’s climate and energy goals, with funding for sustainable mobility, energy efficiency, offshore wind and renewable-based hydrogen.

Electrification is a key aspect of any energy transition, and it is being held back in Belgium by tariff structures that significantly increase the cost of electricity. In some regions, heating homes with electricity is 50% more expensive than with natural gas or fuel oil, even though electric heating is more efficient and less polluting. There is also a need for increased market competition to reduce prices, which requires more efforts to remove barriers so that new companies and innovative services can enter the market.
The world’s demand for natural gas is set to decline slightly in 2022 as a result of higher prices and market disruptions caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, according to the International Energy Agency’s latest quarterly update.

The expected small contraction in global gas demand compares with the IEA’s earlier forecast of 1% growth in the previous quarterly update published in January. The downward revision to the forecast amounts to 50 billion cubic meters, the equivalent of about half of last year’s US liquefied natural gas exports. Global natural gas consumption grew by 4.5% in 2021.

Russia’s attack on Ukraine has added further pressure and uncertainty to an already tight natural gas market, especially in Europe. While there are no legal restrictions on importing Russian natural gas to the European Union at this point, the war has pushed EU governments to seek to reduce their dependence on Russian fossil fuel imports as quickly as possible. The IEA published a 10-Point Plan on 3 March outlining a suite of measures to reduce the volume of Russian gas imports into Europe by over a third within a year while remaining consistent with the EU’s climate ambitions.

Spot gas prices have soared to record highs as Europe’s push for more diversified natural gas supply has intensified demand for liquefied natural gas (LNG) cargoes, with some being diverted away from Asia. Average spot LNG prices in Asia during the 2021-22 heating season were more than four times their five-year average. In Europe, spot LNG prices were five times their five-year average, in spite of a mild winter. The prices were also boosted by Russia’s moves, even before its invasion of Ukraine, to drastically reduce short-term gas sales to Europe, which had left European storage levels 17% below their five-year average at the start of the European heating season.

“Russia’s unprovoked attack on Ukraine is above all a humanitarian disaster, but it has also triggered a major energy supply and security crisis,” said Keisuke Sadamori, the IEA Director for Energy Markets and Security. “While stiffer competition for LNG supplies is inevitable as Europe reduces its reliance on Russian gas, the best and most lasting solution to today’s energy challenges would be to accelerate energy efficiency improvements across our economies and accelerate the transition away from fossil fuels towards low-carbon sources of energy, including domestically produced low-carbon gases.”

Russia is Europe’s largest natural gas supplier, meeting 33% of the region’s demand in 2021, up from 25% in 2009. The flows of natural gas transiting through Ukraine have continued so far since the invasion, despite Ukraine itself experiencing supply disruptions and damage to its gas infrastructure.

Natural gas consumption this year is expected to fall by close to 6% in Europe. In Asia, it is expected to grow by 3% in 2022, a marked slowdown from growth of 7% in 2021. Regions such as the Americas, Africa and the Middle East are expected to be affected less directly by gas market volatility, as they principally rely on domestic gas production. But they are nonetheless being affected by the wider economic impacts of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine including rising commodity prices, weaker purchasing power and lower investment due to dented business confidence.
IEA member countries agreed on 1 April to make 120 million barrels (mb) available from their emergency oil stocks. This collective action, which is the largest in IEA history, comes on top of the 62.7 mb release agreed in March.

As shown in the table below, the latest announced 120 mb stock release will consist of roughly 88 mb of crude oils and 32 mb of oil products. The United States, Japan and Korea will release mostly crude oil, due to the composition of their government stocks. By contrast, most of the stocks made available in Europe will consist of oil products, primarily through the lowering of stockholding obligations set on industry.
Clean energy spending earmarked by governments in response to the Covid-19 crisis has risen by 50% over the past five months and now stands at over USD 710 billion worldwide, though there are troubling imbalances between regions, according to the latest update of the IEA’s Sustainable Recovery Tracker.

This unprecedented amount of enacted spending is more than 40% larger than the global green spending contained in the stimulus packages that governments enacted following the global financial crisis in 2008. Advanced economies account the bulk of this effort, with over USD 370 billion intended to be spent prior to the end of 2023, a level of short-term government spending that would help keep the door open for the IEA’s global pathway to net zero emissions by 2050.

Across emerging and developing economies, however, the total amount of fiscal resources being dedicated to sustainable recovery measures is one-tenth of the amount in advanced economies, reflecting their very different financial and economic circumstances. In emerging and developing economies, around USD 52 billion of sustainable recovery spending is planned by the end of 2023, well short of what is needed in a pathway towards net zero emissions by 2050. The gap is unlikely to narrow in the near term, as governments with already limited fiscal means now face the challenge of maintaining food and fuel affordability for their citizens amid the surge in commodity prices following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

“Countries where clean energy is at the heart of recovery plans are keeping alive the possibility of reaching net zero emissions by 2050, but challenging financial and economic conditions have undermined public resources in much of the rest of the world,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “International cooperation will be essential to change these clean energy investment trends, especially in emerging and developing economies where the need is greatest.”

Even in advanced economies, some of the earmarked funds risk not reaching the market within their envisaged timelines. Delays in setting up government programmes, ongoing supply chain disruptions, labour shortages and financial uncertainty have clogged project pipelines. In addition, consumer-facing measures – such as incentives for building retrofits and electric vehicles – are struggling to reach a wider audience because of issues including red tape and lack of information.

“Governments who can remove red tape and quickly set up effective programmes will be the ones to reap the benefits and position themselves in the new global energy economy that is emerging,” said Dr Birol. “While the latest update of the Sustainable Recovery Tracker does point to promising signs in advanced economies, the world still needs to massively expand its clean energy deployment efforts throughout this decade, first and foremost in developing economies, if we are going to preserve the hope of limiting the global temperature rise to 1.5 °C.”

Rising fossil fuel prices, which have been exacerbated by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, have pushed governments both to enact immediate measures to make energy more affordable and to explore efforts to reduce fossil fuel dependency. The IEA’s tracking shows that emergency affordability support by governments worldwide for households and businesses has reached about USD 270 billion since the start of the winter heating season in the Northern Hemisphere in 2021. But many of the measures most effective in reducing oil and gas demand – such as installing heat pumps and expanding the use of public transport, bike lanes and high-speed rail – have not yet received the needed level of government support to date. The IEA’s recent 10-Point Plans on natural gas and oil highlight the key areas where immediate action can be taken.

Overall, public spending on sustainable energy remains a small proportion of the unprecedented USD 18.2 trillion in fiscal outflows that governments have dedicated to countering the economic impacts of Covid-19. But the IEA estimates that government spending that has been earmarked for spending prior to 2023 could support over USD 1.6 trillion worth of sustainable investments by mobilising higher levels of private sector participation.

The Sustainable Recovery Tracker examines and makes publicly available over 1 000 national policies enacted to accelerate clean energy transitions as part of fiscal measures to limit the economic fallout from the pandemic. The tracker was first published in July 2021 and its update was requested by G20 leaders at their November 2021 meeting in Rome.

The IEA will continue to track government fiscal responses to the ongoing energy crisis, as well as tracking government spending directed at clean energy, in line with the G20’s request. Going forward, the Sustainable Recovery Tracker will broaden the government energy spending it monitors, including how governments use fiscal means to ensure security of supply, maintain affordability and advance clean energy transitions against the benchmark of the IEA’s Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario.
Following an agreement on 1 April by IEA member countries for a new emergency release of oil stocks, the IEA Governing Board confirmed today that the total amount committed to date stands at 120 million barrels, making it the largest stock release in IEA history.

The unanimous agreement among IEA member countries on 1 April for a second collective action this year came in response to the significant strains in oil markets resulting from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. In the days since the decision, each IEA member country has been considering how much it could contribute to the announced response plan, given its domestic circumstances.

The commitments submitted by members reached 120 million barrels to be released over a six month period, demonstrating strong unity. The United States will contribute about 60 million barrels, which are part of the larger drawdown from its Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) that was announced on 31 March.

Over the next six months, around 240 million barrels of emergency oil stocks, the equivalent of well over 1 million barrels per day, will be made available to the global market.

“The unprecedented decision to launch two emergency oil stock releases just a month apart, and on a scale larger than anything before in the IEA’s history, reflects the determination of member countries to protect the global economy from the social and economic impacts of an oil shock following Russia’s aggression against Ukraine,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “This latest collective action once again demonstrates the unity of IEA member countries in their solidarity with Ukraine and their determination to provide stability to the oil market during this challenging time. Events in Ukraine are becoming more distressing by the day, and action by the IEA at this time is needed to relieve some of the strains in energy markets.”

At the start of Russia’s invasion, IEA member countries held 1.5 billion barrels in public reserves and about 575 million barrels under obligations with industry. Therefore, the two IEA collective actions this year of 62.7 million barrels, which was agreed on 1 March, and 120 million barrels amount to 9% of total emergency reserves.

Emergency oil stocks in IEA member countries are either in the form of public stocks (government-owned or by specialised agencies), or stocks held by industry under an obligation of the government. In the case of public stocks, these can be released via tenders or loans to the market, which will be launched and released over the coming weeks and months, depending on the specific stockholding system and market needs in each country. In the case of obligated industry stocks, obligations will be lowered, via legislative decrees or administrative mandates, to make the volumes available for consumption.

The following table shows the breakdown of the oil to be made available by each of the participating countries. More details will be made available in due course on the breakdown of the pledged barrels in crude and products, and public and obligated industry stocks.
The International Energy Agency’s 31 Member Countries agreed on Friday to a new release of oil from emergency reserves in response to the market turmoil caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, underscoring their strong and unified commitment to stabilizing global energy markets.

The agreement was reached at an Extraordinary Meeting of the IEA Governing Board, which was held at the Ministerial level and chaired by US Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm.

The details of the new emergency stock release will be made public early next week. The agreement follows the previous action taken by IEA Member Countries, announced last month, to which they pledged a total of 62.7 million barrels.

The IEA Ministers reiterated their concerns about the energy security impacts of the egregious actions by Russia and voiced support for sanctions imposed by the international community in response. Ministers expressed their solidarity with the people of Ukraine and their democratically elected government in the face of Russia’s appalling and unprovoked violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Governing Board also encouraged member countries to support Ukraine in the supply of oil products.

The Ministers noted that Russia’s war in Ukraine continues to put significant strains on global oil markets, resulting in heightened price volatility. This is taking place against a backdrop of commercial inventories that are at their lowest level since 2014 and a limited ability of oil producers to provide additional supply in the short term. Ministers also noted the particular difficulties in diesel markets.

IEA Members hold emergency stockpiles of 1.5 billion barrels. Today’s agreement will be the fifth time that the IEA releases emergency stocks. Previous collective actions were taken in 1991, 2005, 2011 and on 1 March, 2022.

The prospect of large-scale disruptions to Russian oil production is threatening to create a global oil supply shock. Russia plays an outsized role on global energy markets. It is the world’s third largest oil producer and the largest exporter. Its exports of about 5 million barrels a day of crude oil represent roughly 12% of global trade – and its approximately 2.85 million barrels a day of petroleum products represent around 15% of global refined product trade. Around 60% of Russia’s oil exports go to Europe and another 20% to China.

The Governing Board also recommended that governments and consumers maintain and intensify conservation efforts and energy savings. Ministers welcomed the IEA’s 10-Point Plan to Cut Oil Use as a guide for member countries to reduce their oil consumption.

Ministers also discussed Europe’s significant reliance on Russian natural gas, as well as the importance to accelerate global dialogue with gas producing countries including IEA member countries, to ensure secure, affordable and reliable gas supplies, including LNG, and to continue to pursue a well-managed acceleration of clean energy transitions. On 3 March, the IEA Secretariat released a 10-Point to Reduce the European Union’s Reliance on Russian Natural Gas by next winter – and it is working closely with the European Commission on next steps.

The IEA Secretariat will continue to closely monitor global oil and gas markets.
The impact of Covid-19 has reversed progress on access to electricity and clean cooking while slowing vital improvements in energy efficiency, according to the International Energy Agency’s latest update of data and projections related to key aspects of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. However, renewable energies have shown resilience to the shock caused by the pandemic.

Even if renewables maintain their rapid growth, and if access and efficiency improvements recover to their pre-pandemic pace, these measures will still lag the rate of improvement needed to achieve both universal energy access by 2030 and net zero emissions by 2050, according to the IEA analysis SDG7: Data and Projections, which is fully available online.

UN Sustainable Development Goal 7, or SDG7, aims to ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all by 2030. The IEA is at the forefront of global efforts to assess and analyse progress towards this goal, and its most up-to-date data and projections are available through these interactive data tools. For the first time, these projections incorporate the IEA’s landmark Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario, in which the SDG7 targets are achieved in full.



About 770 million people worldwide lacked access to electricity in 2020, according to the most recent data, breaking a multiyear stretch during which the world was making marked progress. In Africa, the number of people without access increased for the first time since 2013, and the continent now accounts for almost 80% of the world’s population without electricity. Gains slowed down in Asia, but proved more resilient than in Africa, thanks to effective policies and easier access to financing. Without additional policy action, there would still be around 670 million people without access in 2030, almost all of them in Africa.



The number of people lacking clean cooking facilities rose in 2020, with serious implications for household air pollution and deforestation. The pandemic not only shifted government priorities away from clean cooking initiatives, but economic hardship forced many people who had gained access to revert to burning charcoal or wood for fuel.



Worldwide, about 2.5 billion people lack clean cooking options, and under today’s policy settings their number will decrease only to about 2.1 billion by 2030. Reaching full access by 2030 would require finding clean solutions for 280 million people a year, around five times the rate of improvement seen in the years leading up to the pandemic.



Achieving full access to electricity and clean cooking by 2030 would require annual investment of around USD 43 billion – or only 2% of current global energy investment.

The pandemic also slowed energy efficiency progress, with global energy intensity improving by only 0.5% in 2020. Some of this was a result of global market turmoil, but low energy prices, fewer efficiency enhancements and a shift in economic activity towards manufacturing and away from less energy-intensive services all contributed to lower levels of intensity improvements. While early estimates for 2021 suggest a return to progress levels similar to before the pandemic, the average rate of improvement during the 2020s is expected to only reach 2.3% per year. This would be well below the 3.2% pace required to achieve SDG targets and the more than 4% pace needed to be on track to reach net zero emissions by 2050.



One bright spot is that renewable electricity capacity additions reached a new record in 2021, shrugging off the pandemic’s disruptions to economic activity and supply chains. Wind and solar have the fastest growth rates among renewable electricity sources, though hydro remains by far the largest source. With current policies, the world is on track to derive 18% of total final consumption from modern renewables by 2030, up from around 12% in 2019, though this would still be well short of the 32% needed by 2030 to be on track for net zero by mid-century.

The IEA works with four other international organisations – the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD), the World Bank and the World Health Organization (WHO) – to produce an annual report that reports the official statistics indicating progress on the SDG7 targets. The next edition is scheduled to be published in June.
The IEA notes the reports that OPEC+ plans to no longer use the IEA’s monthly Oil Market Report, a key reference for fundamental data and analysis, as a secondary source. IEA data and analysis remain available to all those seeking rigorous and objective market information. To support transparency, the IEA will henceforth make its monthly update on OPEC+ oil production available to the public.
His reappointment, for a third term, comes at a pivotal moment for the IEA amid heightened awareness that clean energy transitions must be not only rapid but also secure.

The vote to reappoint Dr Birol took place during the 2022 IEA Ministerial. The two-day meeting was chaired by US Energy Secretary Jennifer M. Granholm, and brought together energy and climate ministers from more than 40 countries.

New mandates detailed in the 2022 IEA Ministerial communiqué set the IEA up to evolve in its mission and impact, including by ensuring energy security during the energy transition, leading the global energy sector’s fight against climate change, and strengthening the IEA family of governments.

“Our decision today for an additional term for Dr Birol as IEA Executive Director again confirms our confidence in his skills and expertise,” said Secretary Granholm, the Chair of the 2022 IEA Ministerial Meeting. “We look forward to working with the IEA under his continued leadership as we ramp up efforts to accelerate the clean energy transition on the road to a net zero future while strengthening our energy security.”

“I am very pleased that we have reappointed Dr Birol as Executive Director for a third term,” said Ambassador Hiroshi Oe, Chair of the IEA Governing Board. “This sets the organisation up perfectly to deliver on the commitments laid out in the 2022 IEA Ministerial communiqué, and play a key role in accelerating sustainable and secure clean energy transitions.”

“I’m honoured that IEA members have put their trust in me to lead the Agency into a new era following what I believe may turn out to be the most consequential Ministerial Meeting in the IEA’s near 50-year history,” said Dr Birol. “The energy world is changing fast and needs to change faster still. With our new mandates we are now ready to respond and chart a new course for the IEA, not just for the next two years but for decades to come. My energy, enthusiasm and commitment to lead my outstanding colleagues within the IEA Secretariat and to serve our Member Governments have never been stronger.”

Dr Birol has served as Executive Director since September 2015. Under his leadership, the IEA has been instrumental in underpinning a significant increase in global climate ambition and in responding to new vulnerabilities and risks to energy security. As well as leading the IEA, Dr Birol chairs the World Economic Forum’s (Davos) Energy Advisory Board. Last year, TIME named him on its annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world. He is also the recipient of numerous state decorations, including earlier this year the French Legion of Honour.
Today International Energy Agency Ministers convened for a discussion on global energy security and clean energy deployment. We condemn, in the strongest possible terms, Russia’s unlawful invasion of Ukraine, which has destroyed lives and upended peace and security in Europe. Russia’s invasion threatens global energy security and democratic principles. Russia’s actions, including its use of energy as a weapon, threatens the rules-based international order that has prevailed since the end of the Second World War. Energy should never be used as a means of political coercion or to threaten national security. We demand that Russia immediately cease its military aggression, withdraw its troops from the entire territory of Ukraine, and fully respect Ukraine’s territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence.

We further express solidarity with Ukraine, the Ukrainian people, and its democratically elected government. We offer our deepest sympathies to the innocent victims of this senseless war. We strongly condemn the Russian attacks on Ukrainian civilians and civilian infrastructure, including schools, hospitals, and civilian energy infrastructure. We are grateful to our Ukrainian colleagues for their participation in today’s proceedings and for offering views on energy security in Ukraine and beyond. We welcome coordinated action within the IEA and across multilateral organizations to assist Ukraine in addressing the challenges to its energy security, and further enhance the security of global energy supplies. We highlight the need to accelerate the energy transition and further diversify the energy system towards net zero solutions in accordance with the goals of the Paris Agreement.

We acknowledge the key role of energy savings to reduce oil and gas dependency. We welcome the IEA’s 10-Point Plan to Cut Oil Use and we invite the IEA to follow up on the voluntary implementation of demand side measures with member countries, based on national circumstances.
Global energy leaders met in Paris this week for the International Energy Agency’s 2022 Ministerial Meeting, sending a strong message of unity on the need to strengthen energy security, reduce market volatility, and accelerate clean energy transitions worldwide.

Chaired by US Secretary of Energy Jennifer M. Granholm, the two-day meeting of energy and climate ministers representing more than 40 governments from around the world took place amid the severe energy market turmoil and energy security concerns triggered by Russia’s unjust and unprompted invasion of Ukraine last month. Yaroslav Demchenkov, Ukraine’s Deputy Minister of Energy for European Integration, attended the meeting in person as a special guest, and Ukrainian Minister of Energy Herman Halushchenko participated virtually in one of the plenary sessions.

The major gathering of energy decision makers took place just a few months after the COP26 Climate Change Conference in Glasgow, where governments from around the world raised their ambitions for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

Ministers from the IEA’s 31 Member Countries said the Ministerial Meeting marks “the launch of a new phase of the Agency”, with a series of new mandates setting out its mission going forwards. “In addition to ensuring global energy security, the IEA has a new guiding principle: supporting countries in the global effort to attain net zero greenhouse gas emissions in the energy sector by mid-century,” they said in a joint communiqué. Achieving net zero emissions by mid-century would give the world an even chance of limiting the rise in global temperatures to 1.5 °C, which is a critical threshold for avoiding the worst effects of climate change.

The new IEA mandates cover areas such as ensuring energy security during the energy transition and leading the global energy sector’s fight against climate change, with a notable emphasis on expanding the IEA’s work on the critical minerals needed for clean energy technologies.

“Today, IEA Member Countries and the European Commission banded together on actions to support Ukraine, stabilize the global energy market, and ultimately end our reliance on nations that weaponize fossil energy,” Secretary Granholm. “The urgent need to accelerate the equitable transition to clean energy remains a top priority, and must be accelerated. I’m honored to work alongside this collection of the world’s incredibly talented energy leaders. We are committed to a clean energy future that will create millions of good paying jobs, mitigate the destructive impacts climate change, and ensure a peaceful energy future.”

“The energy world is changing fast and needs to change faster still,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “The IEA is ready to support the twin goals of energy security and the clean energy transition, and I’m delighted that our Member Countries, under the leadership of Secretary Granholm, are giving us the responsibilities and the resources to tackle the major challenges of our time. The IEA was founded nearly 50 years ago during the oil crisis of the 1970s, and this Ministerial Meeting is setting us up to help lead the response to the energy and climate crises we face today.”

The Ministerial Meeting was the opportunity to welcome Lithuania as the IEA’s 31st Member Country. Ministers also announced that Argentina and Egypt are the latest major emerging economies to become IEA Association countries, joining Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Morocco, Singapore, South Africa and Thailand.

The IEA also received a significant funding boost from governments to enable it to significantly scale up its work supporting the transition to clean energy in emerging economies.

Over the two days, ministers, business leaders, investors, civil society representatives and others discussed a range of crucial energy topics.

A special event was dedicated to how to better adapt policy, regulatory and legislative frameworks to accelerate deployment of the clean energy and low emissions technologies crucial to meeting international climate goals.

“Along with securing supplies of gas and oil, low emissions technologies are essential to long-term energy security and are the cornerstone of practical emissions reduction strategies,” said Angus Taylor, Australia’s Minister for Industry, Energy and Emissions Reduction who was one of the Ministerial Meeting’s three Vice-Chairs. “An acceleration in the deployment of low emissions technology will only be achieved by driving the costs of these technologies down.”

Ministers also underscored the importance of ensuring that clean energy transition policies are people-centred and take into account issues of fairness and inclusion, noting the need to sustain clean energy jobs and equitable opportunities.

“We have to create an accelerated clean energy transition – and it has to happen with the people at the center to ensure sustainable green job growth,” said Dan Jørgensen, Denmark’s Minister for Climate, Energy and Utilities, who was also a Ministerial Vice-Chair. “Coming to Paris for the IEA Ministerial has reassured me that the political determination and the industrial and technological expertise is in place. Now we just have to act.”

Participants at the Ministerial also paid particular attention to the challenges and opportunities facing Africa as the world increasingly shifts towards clean energy – and how international cooperation can support African countries in reaching their energy and climate goals.

“The global transition to renewable energy puts Africa in the center,” said Tinne Van der Straeten, Belgium’s Minister of Energy and a Vice-Chair of the Ministerial. “The African continent has vast potential for wind and solar technologies, allowing for the development of onshore and offshore wind farms, large scale solar parks and green hydrogen facilities. It is an opportunity for the entire continent while also supporting other countries’ transition objectives.”

In response to Executive Director Birol’s call for the IEA to be able to make its energy data freely available, the ministers requested a review of options that will enable this while offsetting the impacts on the Agency’s budget. The bulk of the IEA’s current data sales come from private companies and consultancies using it for commercial purposes. The revenue generated from these sales represents around 25% of the IEA’s core budget, reducing the need to call on member countries for additional funding.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) Governing Board, at ministerial level, has adopted the following ministerial communique:

1. We, the Ministers responsible for energy of the IEA Member states and the European Union, met in Paris and virtually on 23-24 March 2022, announcing the following communique adopted on 3 February 2022, with United States Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm serving as Chair and Australian Minister for Industry, Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor, Belgian Minister of Energy Tinne Van der Straeten, and Danish Minister of Climate, Energy and Utilities Dan Jørgensen supporting as Vice Chairs.

2. We welcomed also Ministers representing IEA Association and Accession Countries, the IEA Energy Business Council, and other invited guests and thank them for their valuable contributions to the meeting.

3. We note that this meeting was among the first major energy-related events following the COP26 climate conference in Glasgow, United Kingdom. We welcome that COP26 and the Glasgow Climate Pact brings the world closer to achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement, and also acknowledge that stabilization at 1.5 degrees Celsius is difficult but still within reach.

4. We held our discussions at this meeting under the theme, “The Year of Implementation: Accelerating Global Action on Clean Energy and Energy Security”, recognizing the need to move to practical, concrete clean energy transitions and urgent energy sector transformation toward the global objectives embodied in the Paris Agreement, including the goals of Agenda 2030, and attainment of net zero globally by 2050. We note that clean energy transitions and energy sector transformation are and will continue to be major drivers of economic growth, and jobs, increasing access to affordable energy and alleviating energy poverty. The IEA, the International Finance Corporation, and others have estimated that the commitments under the Paris Agreement created a tens of trillions of U.S. dollars investment and job creation opportunity through this decade alone.

5. We applaud the work of the IEA, its global impact, and its essential and expanding role in energy security and the fight to reduce energy-related greenhouse gas emissions through safe, sustainable, inclusive, and secure clean energy transitions.

6. We recognize the importance of ensuring an Agency that is “fit for purpose” in view of the pathways to global net zero emissions by 2050, and equipped to advise and guide Members in their safe, secure, sustainable, and affordable clean energy transitions and, where designated, to support Association countries, IEA Clean Energy Transition Programme partners in their transitions, recognizing their own unique challenges, and working together with regional partner organizations.

7. We view this Ministerial as the launch of a new phase of the Agency to address today’s energy and energy-related needs in a climate-constrained world. With the mandates adopted today, the IEA will evolve in its mission and impact. In addition to ensuring global energy security, the IEA has a new guiding principle: supporting countries in the global effort to attain net zero greenhouse gas emissions in the energy sector by mid-century.

8. We recognize that energy reliability and affordability is critical in and of itself, and for preserving public support for climate action and successful clean energy transitions. Recent volatility in markets has placed a burden on consumers at a critical moment of economic recovery. However, we resolve to accelerate clean energy transitions as a lasting solution to prevent energy price spikes, such as the recent ones, and to ensure sufficient affordable energy supply, including through securing sufficient investment in energy, universal energy access, uninterrupted flow of energy resources, and consumer protection, especially for the most vulnerable populations. We call for transparent and competitive energy markets to minimize the negative impact of price volatility on citizens.

9. We applaud the IEA's holistic approach to understanding and analyzing the energy sector. We acknowledge increased Members’ expectations for the IEA to work in sectors in an increasingly complex energy security environment beyond oil, natural gas, and electricity, in the context of net zero transitions, to include but not be limited to, renewable energy, zero emissions transport, greenhouse gas abatement in fossil energy, clean gases and fuels, in particular from renewable sources, including hydrogen, heating and cooling, energy efficiency, and critical minerals and materials.

10. We agree on the importance of an agile, effective, and efficient Agency that can deliver on Members’ vision and priorities as laid out in these interlinked mandates. We confirm our commitment to explore ways for providing adequate and sustainable funding for the IEA to achieve the objectives outlined in this communique.

Leading the Global Energy Sector’s Fight Against Climate Change

11. We call on the IEA to continue to play a leading role in the energy sector transformation in light of climate change, concentrating on helping countries achieve net zero emissions by 2050, and expansion of related job opportunities. We direct the Secretariat to expand IEA activities to support decision makers to turn commitments into practical actions that decouple economic growth from growth in greenhouse gas emissions, while maintaining security and affordability of energy supply.

12. We recognize the importance of our individual commitments to national net zero strategies, including near-term actions, to leverage the goal of the IEA to support achievement of global net zero emissions by 2050.

13. We support the IEA’s continued development of more refined and actionable national net zero energy sector roadmaps — recognizing particular countries’ needs and requirements — to track national and global progress towards reducing energy sector emissions, increasing clean energy job opportunities, and other relevant goals and investment, enhance assistance to Members and other priority countries, and assist the energy sector in addressing barriers related to innovation, regulation, and the environment.

14. We acknowledge the Breakthrough Agenda, launched at COP26 in Glasgow, and its potential for catalyzing clean energy innovation, development, and deployment in major emitting sectors, including through the associated Global Checkpoint Process, in which the IEA is playing a role in developing a Global State of the Transition Report in partnership with others.

15. We welcome the recommendations of the IEA Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions, and the need to incorporate gender, equality, and social inclusion in all policies and to sustain clean energy jobs and equitable opportunities for all. We embrace the priority of supporting people and communities as active participants as decision makers, innovators, and beneficiaries of clean energy actions, integrating the voices of younger generations in decision-making. We applaud and support continuation of IEA efforts to promote gender equality and diversity across the energy sector, as well as within the IEA itself, including through improved data, the IEA Gender Advisory Council, and cooperation with C3E International. We support and direct the IEA Secretariat and the Council to continue to develop data analysis and policy recommendations on these priority issues.

16. We reaffirm energy efficiency as the “first fuel” and a critical component of our net zero strategies as it still represents the cleanest and, in many cases, the most cost-effective way to meet our energy needs. We welcome the significant progress achieved in the development and deployment of renewable energies and clean technologies and reaffirm their important contribution to reaching our net zero goals.

17. We emphasize the importance of non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions abatement, including methane, alongside action on reducing CO2 emissions in the energy sector, and the need for early and sustained reductions in energy-related methane emissions. We welcome the IEA’s role on methane-related data, policy, and regulatory advice in support of international methane reduction efforts, including the Global Methane Pledge, International Methane Emissions Observatory, and other related efforts. Similarly, we support rapid reduction of other short-lived climate pollutants in energy and energy-related sectors.

18. We affirm the critical roles of technology, innovation, and investment in enabling global net zero ambition and reaffirm the critical role of the IEA, including its Technology Collaboration Programme, in addressing barriers to development, uptake, and accelerated deployment of safe and sustainable clean energy technologies.

Ensuring Energy Security During the Energy Transition

19. We reaffirm the importance of maintaining global energy security and the IEA’s central role in that effort. We commit to continue working together to prevent energy and resource supply disruptions and ensure diversification of energy sources, supplies, routes, and means of transport to build system resilience and promote competitive, reliable energy markets based on transparent rules. We note the IEA’s consistent analysis that ensuring energy security and addressing climate change in the energy sector and related sectors go hand-in-hand and, accordingly, emphasize that IEA work on both issues, including as described in this communique, is therefore inextricably interlinked.

20. We recognize the need to modernize the IEA oil stockholding system and requirement, in the context of emerging energy economy dynamics, national and global climate, energy, net zero objectives, and transition to a decarbonized energy sector. We direct the Governing Board to recommend to Ministers for the next regularly scheduled IEA Ministerial ways to future-proof and, if necessary, adjust the oil stockholding requirement while recognizing the need to maintain a robust and efficient emergency response mechanism suitable for the transition to a net zero future and potential involvement of the full IEA Family in future emergency response as decided by the IEA Governing Board.

21. We recognize the importance of gas security, including exploration of appropriate coordination options, and commend the IEA's work on LNG and strengthening resilience of production and distribution systems. We also highlight the growing role of zero-emitting gases or hydrogen, with particular attention to renewable forms, in helping to enhance energy security, while reducing emissions. We commit to taking practical action to address the environmental impacts, including the abatement of methane emissions in the gas system, from drilling to transportation, distribution, and utilization.

22. We recognize the importance to energy security and clean energy transitions of ensuring clean, affordable, reliable, resilient, and secure energy infrastructure and note increasing interdependencies, for example, as a growing share of transport demand is electrified. We applaud the IEA’s energy systems approach that looks holistically across the energy sector, and direct the Secretariat to continue analyzing energy infrastructure including technologies, policies, investment, interlinkages and cross-sectoral integration, and similar issues.

23. We agree to deepen work on electric power security, the resilience of electricity systems and broader energy infrastructure to extreme weather events and intentional incidents (cyber and physical), and the opportunities that can be harnessed from integration of very high shares of renewable energy into these systems, supported by appropriate electricity market designs and policy frameworks. We recognize that flexible supply and demand resources need to be secured in the transition of power systems, and that this flexibility can be enhanced by greater energy storage, demand response, digital and smart grids, hydrogen, ammonia, and increased regional grid connections and trading.

24. We commit to deepen IEA work on safe, sustainable, resilient, and reliable clean energy supply chains including identifying opportunities to diversify production, increase transparency, and enhance international cooperation.

25. We recognize the growing importance of critical minerals and materials to clean energy transitions and endorse recent work by the IEA on this topic. We direct the Governing Board and Secretariat to investigate and report back, no later than the next IEA Ministerial meeting, on the comparative advantages of different methods of ensuring the availability, security and responsible sourcing of energy-specific critical minerals and materials, including options to strategically manage resources such as recycling, supply chain resilience and sustainability, stockpiling, and enhanced research development and deployment into improved design of and alternative materials for clean energy systems, with the objective to support investment in new sources of supply and development of a circular economy that accelerates clean energy transitions and ensures affordable security of supply.

26. We note that countries interested in closer cooperation launched at this meeting an IEA voluntary critical minerals security program which will include stockpiling as well as potentially other security elements including recycling and resilient and transparent supply chain mechanisms, whereby participating Members agree to work together and share experience and mutually agreed data with the IEA from their nationally self-determined critical mineral stockpiling programs, or alternative measures aligned toward the same outcomes.

Strengthening the IEA Family

27. We warmly welcome Lithuania as the IEA’s 31st Member and applaud its rapid compliance with IEA membership provisions.

28. We welcome the continued interest in IEA membership from Chile, Colombia, and Israel and encourage their progress toward accession to the IEA’s underlying Agreement on an International Energy Program. We commit to strengthen our engagement with them as an important part of the IEA Family.

29. We recognize Association countries’ longstanding commitment to and collaboration with the goals and objectives of the IEA. We commit to deepen IEA engagement with them as another important part of the IEA Family.

30. We applaud the Governing Board’s decision in October 2021 to selectively lift the pause on Association and welcome Argentina and Egypt as the newest Association countries. We direct the Governing Board, in consultation with the Standing Group on Global Energy Dialogue, to consider future possible candidates for Association, including countries in sub-Saharan Africa and other under-represented regions.

31. We agree that there should be a pathway for IEA membership for likeminded countries willing to make the commitments to the mission and objectives of the IEA, including the IEA Shared Goals and the objectives embodied in this communique. We commit to pursue a bilateral arrangement between the IEA and India under Article 63 that would be negotiated in the final stages of the Strategic Partnership. We direct the Governing Board to elaborate further details of the bilateral arrangement.

IEA Resources: Moving to a Sustainable Funding Model

32. We recognize the need for more predictable and sustainable resources for the IEA in light of our increased ambition and the demands created by these mandates.

33. We task the Governing Board to organize an independent review of the IEA budget, standing groups, and committees to inform the 2025-2026 Programme of Work and Budget. We also ask for a review of options that will allow more IEA data to be made freely available while offsetting any budgetary implications.

34. We commit to explore by 2023 the adequacy of total Assessed Contributions to ensure the IEA has predictable and sustained funding to fulfil core responsibilities and to respond to secure its long-term financial stability.

35. We commit to assess mechanisms to increase use of voluntary contributions, especially multi-year contributions where feasible. We reaffirm the need for Member-driven oversight of voluntary contributions to ensure the IEA’s strategic direction.

36. We direct the Governing Board to review and, where appropriate, adopt mechanisms to improve the transparency of voluntary contributions and oversight while maintaining flexibility for these contributions.

37. We welcome the reaffirmed joint commitment to Clean Energy Transitions Programme (CETP) funding through a collective annual investment by existing and new funders.

Further Considerations

38. We recognize that the mandates in this communique, and other IEA functions, can be furthered through coordinated action with other bodies. We therefore direct the Secretariat to strengthen IEA cooperation with other initiatives and organizations, including Clean Energy Ministerial, Energy Efficiency Hub, International Atomic Energy Agency, International Renewable Energy Agency, Mission Innovation, Nuclear Energy Agency, Sustainable Energy for All, and others where appropriate. We praise the influential role played by the IEA in the G7, G20 and UNFCCC COP processes, and we support the Agency's continuous engagement in those fora.

39. In light of these mandates, and their impact on the mission, priorities, and operations of the IEA, we may opt to analyze the need for a review of the IEA’s underlying Agreement on an International Energy Program. We emphasize that opting to do so neither pre-judges the conclusions of such a review or exploration, including the possibility of leaving the Agreement unchanged, nor delays the implementation of the mandates in this communique.

40. We further decide that we may opt to explore the potential utility of a special activity organized under Article 65 of the Agreement to support countries in an orderly clean energy transition, building on the strengths of the current Association model and Clean Energy Transition Programme.
The International Energy Agency has received a major funding boost from member countries to enable it to significantly scale up its work supporting the transition to clean energy in emerging economies.

The funding increase for the IEA’s Clean Energy Transitions Programme (CETP) was announced today at a special event on the side-lines of the 2022 IEA Ministerial Meeting in Paris where ministers from IEA member countries and beyond are meeting to discuss how to accelerate clean energy transitions and strengthen energy security.

The new funding stream will support efforts to achieve greater clean energy investment in emerging economies and provides a strong endorsement by governments of the IEA’s role in helping the global energy system transition to net zero emissions.

“To solve the climate crisis, we must take bold and transnational actions to ensure a green and sustainable future,” said Danish Minister for Climate and Energy Dan Jørgensen, who chaired the event on the CETP today. “The CETP is the main vehicle for the IEA to drive real global change and clean energy transition towards net zero. To this end, I am thrilled that we are so many supporters and funders to the programme.”

Since its creation in 2017, the CETP has established strong cooperation on clean energy with the world's largest emerging economies including Brazil, China, India, Indonesia and South Africa. Drawing on the IEA’s expertise, the CETP provides a range of policy advice, training and capacity building to help these economies move towards sustainable low-carbon solutions while ensuring energy security and economic opportunities.

“The world needs a massive surge in clean energy investment, especially in emerging economies, to put emissions on a rapid downward trajectory,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “The issue is not a shortage of capital worldwide but ensuring the money finds its way to the countries, sectors and projects where it is most needed. The Clean Energy Transitions Programme is a vital part of the IEA’s work to help emerging economies strengthen policy making and ramp up clean energy investment.”

According to IEA analysis, annual capital spending on clean energy in emerging and developing economies needs to expand from less than USD 150 billion in 2020 to over USD 1 trillion by 2030 if the world is to get on track for reaching net zero emissions by 2050.

The new CETP funding stream of EUR 20 million a year will come from voluntary contributions by 15 IEA member countries and the European Union who confirmed their financial support through 2030 in a new Joint Commitment today. The increased funding will expand the IEA’s development of more tailored and actionable national net zero roadmaps for emerging economies – and enhance efforts to track progress on reducing energy sector emissions.

The CETP is funded by Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United States and the European Commission. Among those, Belgium, Ireland, Spain and the United States are all providing contributions to the programme for the first time as part of the new Joint Commitment on funding announced today.

The stepped-up funding follows the COP26 Climate Change Conference in Glasgow, where countries renewed their commitment to mobilise USD 100 billion of climate finance a year for developing and emerging economies. A key focus of the CETP is helping emerging economies strengthen their policy and regulatory frameworks to better attract the clean energy investment they need to advance their transitions. The programme also works on addressing issues related to innovation and the environment.
The clean energy transition is an opportunity for many African countries to bypass traditional fuels and infrastructure and go straight to building sustainable energy systems, but they will need the support of the international community, especially to attract the necessary investments.



Ministers and stakeholders from across Africa met today in Paris at an event organised by the International Energy Agency to share their experiences and views of the continent’s energy priorities and challenges. The event was chaired by Belgian Minister of Energy Tinne Van der Straeten ahead of the IEA’s 2022 Ministerial Meeting.



Assessing the situation following the COP26 Climate Change Conference last November – and ahead of COP27, which Egypt will host later this year – participants in today’s event agreed on the need for strengthened international action to address existing barriers to clean energy investment and to promote capital deployment across the continent.



Africa is already one of the regions of the world most affected by climate disorders and is home to one-sixth of the global population. Yet, it accounts for less than 6% of global energy consumption and 2% of cumulative global emissions. The continent faces a parallel imperative of extending electricity access to hundreds of millions of citizens who are currently deprived of it, which would stimulate economic growth and help attain sustainable development goals.



At the same time, Africa has the potential to play a leading role as the world’s energy systems transition to a net zero future. The continent’s geographic diversity holds huge potential for solar and wind power, and its soils are home to many of the minerals and rare earths needed for clean energy technologies.



The IEA has long placed a special focus on Africa, particularly in terms of its work on energy access issues. The Agency’s analysis has highlighted that because of perceived risks, energy investments in Africa often face much higher financing costs than comparable projects in developed markets. Later this year, the IEA plans to publish its latest Africa Energy Outlook report, which will focus on addressing this issue in particular ahead of COP27.

Following today’s event, Minister Van der Straeten recommended to the broader IEA membership that the Agency further deepen its engagement with Africa to identify practical steps that industry, governments and international organisations can take to drive down the cost of energy investments while focusing on the technologies best suited to Africa.

The 2022 IEA Ministerial Meeting is taking place in Paris on 23 and 24 March under the theme of accelerating global action on clean energy and energy security. It is chaired by US Secretary of Energy Jennifer M. Granholm. Ministers from IEA Member, Association and Accession countries, and other key partners, are taking part in the events along with top representatives from industry, finance and civil society.
Reducing global greenhouse gas emissions in line with the goals world leaders set at the COP26 Climate Change Conference requires a fundamental transformation of the energy sector, but that will only happen if it brings benefits to people and has their support.



Ministers, industry leaders and stakeholders from civil society met today at an event in Paris organised by the International Energy Agency to discuss how to ensure that their clean energy transition policies are people-centred and inclusive.



The event – taking place just ahead of the 2022 IEA Ministerial Meeting – was chaired by Dr. Anders Hoffmann, Deputy Permanent Secretary of the Danish Ministry for Climate, Energy and Utilities on behalf of Dan Jørgensen, Denmark’s Minister for Climate, Energy and Utilities. Participants included Sharan Burrow, General Secretary of the International Trade Union Confederation, and energy ministers from Canada, Chile, Colombia, South Africa and many other countries. Chiagozie Udeh, Global Focal Point for the UN Sustainable Development Goal 7 Youth Constituency, provided a youth perspective on energy transitions.



In early 2021, IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol convened the Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions to bring together voices from across governments and civil society. Headed by Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen of Denmark, the Global Commission held a series of meeting last year chaired by Minister Jørgensen and co-chaired by Sophie Gladima, Senegal’s Minister for Petroleum and Energy. Its work resulted in 12 recommendations published ahead of COP26 to assist decision makers with a people-centred approach to clean energy policy making that ensures the benefits and costs involved in the transformation of our energy system are distributed fairly.



The IEA has extended its work on encouraging broad social involvement in the development of policies for the clean energy transition by convening a Clean Energy Labour Council, which held its first meeting earlier this month, to focus specifically on issues related to jobs, skills and training. While the major investments needed to transform our energy systems will be a major net creator of jobs, they will not always be in the same places and require the same skills as the jobs they will replace.

Today’s meeting discussed the specific recommendations of the Global Commission and called on the IEA Secretariat to develop a work programme to expand its work on people-centred issues. The IEA will continue to work with governments, unions, businesses and all stakeholders globally to ensure clean energy transitions are truly people centred and inclusive.

The 2022 IEA Ministerial Meeting is taking place in Paris on 23 and 24 March under the theme of accelerating global action on clean energy and energy security. It is chaired by US Secretary of Energy Jennifer M. Granholm. Ministers from IEA Member, Association and Accession countries, and other key partners, are taking part in the events along with top representatives from industry, finance and civil society.
Reaching net zero emissions by mid-century requires the rapid rollout of existing clean energy solutions such as solar and wind as well as major advances in low-carbon technologies that are still at the development stage. Yet the successful deployment of these technologies faces multiple barriers that go beyond the issue of cost.

Ministers, business leaders and international organisations met today in Paris at an event organised by the International Energy Agency to consider how to better adapt policy, regulatory and legislative frameworks to accelerate deployment of the clean energy and low emissions technologies crucial to meeting international climate goals.

The ministers and panellists emphasised that the private and public sectors must collaborate to eliminate barriers if they are to achieve their shared goals of building inclusive and resilient clean energy supply chains and economies, creating sustainable jobs, and driving clean investment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. They agreed that solutions need to be tailored to fit national and regional circumstances. They also discussed supply chain issues that have recently come to the fore.

The event, held ahead of the IEA’s 2022 Ministerial Meeting, was co-chaired by Angus Taylor, Australia’s Minister for Industry, Energy and Emissions Reduction, and Arifin Tasrif, Indonesia’s Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources. Indonesia holds the presidency of the G20 while Australia along with the IEA will host the Indo-Pacific Clean Energy Supply Chain Forum in July. The event included top executives from leading energy and technology companies.

The IEA provides unrivalled global data, analysis and modelling on clean energy technologies, including in its flagship Energy Technology Perspectives series. The Agency has been monitoring the development and rollout of the key technologies through platforms such as Tracking Clean Energy Progress. The IEA is also leading the tracking work under the Glasgow Breakthroughs agreed at last year’s COP26 Climate Change Conference.

Emerging technologies – including electrolytic hydrogen, advanced batteries and direct air capture – are expected to deliver substantial reductions in a pathway to net zero emissions by 2050. There is a need for internationally agreed standards and certification schemes to create confidence in these new markets. With its expertise and convening power, the IEA is well placed to bring together public and private sector stakeholders to facilitate the development of global markets for low-emission technologies and to support the establishment of robust standards, policies and reporting frameworks.

Following today’s discussions, Minister Taylor and Minister Tasrif said they would present a series of recommendations to the wider IEA family of countries. These include recognising the IEA’s technical and analytical expertise; identifying practical actions that industry, government and international organisations can take to drive down the cost of low emission technologies; agreeing on the need to address regulatory, financial and supply chain barriers to deployment; and requesting that the IEA continue to facilitate and coordinate international cooperation on technology and sectoral decarbonisation.

The 2022 IEA Ministerial Meeting is taking place in Paris on 23 and 24 March under the theme of accelerating global action on clean energy and energy security. It is chaired by US Secretary of Energy Jennifer M. Granholm. Ministers from IEA Member, Association and Accession countries, and other key partners, are taking part in the events along with top representatives from industry, finance and civil society.
Armenia’s electricity production is heavily reliant on fuel imports and a continued emphasis on energy efficiency and solar deployment would help diversify the country’s energy supply, though further infrastructure investments may be needed to integrate the large planned increase in variable renewable sources, according to a new policy review by the International Energy Agency.



While Armenia has a diverse generation mix of gas-fired thermal, hydropower and nuclear, Russia supplies all of its nuclear fuel, and the bulk of its gas, along with some volumes from Iran. As a result, 70% of Armenia’s electricity production is effectively reliant on fuel imports from the two countries.

Since the IEA’s last review in 2014/15, Armenia has developed an Energy Strategy, released in 2021, which calls for up to 1 000 MW of solar PV capacity to be installed by 2030, lifting the share of grid-connected solar to 15% of generation. Armenia is heavily promoting renewables not only to increase energy security, but also to meet greenhouse-gas reduction commitments.

Further emphasis on energy efficiency could also help improve energy security, according to the IEA. The policy review notes that Armenia still has considerable potential to increase efficiency, particularly in buildings such as the multi-apartment blocks where the majority of Armenians live. Efficiency in the buildings sector is covered in more detail in another recent publication by the IEA’s EU4Energy Programme, Energy Efficient Buildings in Armenia: A Roadmap (October 2020).



Around 85% of Armenia’s gas is currently supplied by pipelines from Russia passing through Georgia. The remainder is imported from Iran but through a pipeline network that is controlled by Armenia’s gas monopoly. The Iranian gas currently is used only to generate electricity that is re-exported to Iran as part of a gas-for-electricity swap.

The IEA survey points out that Armenia’s heavy reliance on a single source of natural gas is compounded by its substantial dependence on gas, which accounts for the largest share of the country’s total energy supply. For example, both the residential heating and road-transport sectors rely on natural gas as their main fuel. Armenia has no known oil production or reserves, nor any refineries.

The country is also aiming to enhance energy security by substantially increasing electricity interconnections with neighbouring Georgia and Iran.

Since the late 1990s, the EU and several other international partners have strongly encouraged Armenia to close its Soviet-era WWER-400 nuclear reactor, which typically supplies 30-40% of the country’s electricity. Armenia has improved nuclear safety measures in order to meeting International Atomic Energy Agency goals for existing nuclear power plants. The IEA advises the government to continue close coordination with the International Atomic Energy Agency, EU and other relevant international organisations on nuclear safety issues.

The IEA commends Armenia for avoiding energy subsidies and for its decisive steps to implement a liberalised electricity market, which was launched in February 2022. Exposing investors and consumers to the true costs of energy supply, accompanied by a safety net for the most vulnerable customers, helps ensure efficient energy investment and use.
In the face of the emerging global energy crisis triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, practical actions by governments and citizens in advanced economies and beyond can achieve significant reductions in oil demand in a matter of months, reducing the risk of a major supply crunch, according to new analysis released by the International Energy Agency today.

These efforts would reduce the price pain being felt by consumers around the world, lessen the economic damage, shrink Russia’s hydrocarbon revenues, and help move oil demand towards a more sustainable pathway.

If fully carried out in advanced economies, the measures recommended by the IEA’s new 10-Point Plan to Cut Oil Use would lower oil demand by 2.7 million barrels a day within four months – equivalent to the oil demand of all the cars in China. This would significantly reduce potential strains at a time when a large amount of Russian supplies may no longer reach the market and the peak demand season of July and August is approaching. The measures would have an even greater effect if adopted in part or in full in emerging economies as well.

The new report also includes recommendations for decisions to be taken now by governments and citizens to transition from the short-term emergency actions included in the 10-Point Plan to sustained measures that would put countries’ oil demand into a structural decline consistent with a pathway towards net zero emissions by 2050.

Since the majority of oil demand comes from transport, the IEA’s 10-Point Plan focuses on how to use less oil getting people and goods from A to B, drawing on concrete measures that have already been put to use in a diverse range of countries and cities. The short-term actions it proposes include reducing the amount of oil consumed by cars through lower speed limits, working from home, occasional limits on car access to city centres, cheaper public transport, more carpooling and other initiatives – and greater use of high-speed rail and virtual meetings instead of air travel.

“As a result of Russia’s appalling aggression against Ukraine, the world may well be facing its biggest oil supply shock in decades, with huge implications for our economies and societies,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol, who is launching the Plan at a news conference today with Barbara Pompili, the Minister for the Ecological Transition of France, which currently holds the Presidency of the European Union.

“IEA Member Countries have already stepped in to support the global economy with an initial release of millions of barrels of emergency oil stocks, but we can also take action on demand to avoid the risk of a crippling oil crunch,” Dr Birol said. “Our 10-Point Plan shows this can be done through measures that have already been tested and proven in multiple countries.”

“France and all European countries must get out of their dependence on fossil fuels, in particular on Russian fossil fuels as soon as possible,” Minister Pompili said. “It is an absolute necessity, for the climate but also for our energy sovereignty. The plan proposed today by the IEA offers some interesting ideas, some of which are in line with our own ideas to reduce our dependence on oil.”

Advanced economies account for almost half of global oil demand. Many of them, including the largest energy consumers, are required as members of the IEA to have oil demand restraint plans ready as part of their emergency response measures.

Most of the proposed actions in the 10-Point Plan would require changes in the behaviour of consumers, supported by government measures. How and if these actions are implemented is subject to each country’s own circumstances – in terms of their energy markets, transport infrastructure, social and political dynamics and other aspects.

The IEA stands ready to support all countries in designing and optimising measures to suit their respective circumstances. Government regulations and mandates have proven to be very effective for successfully implementing these measures in various countries and cities, combined with public information and awareness campaigns.

Ultimately, however, reducing oil demand does not depend solely on national governments. Several of the measures can be implemented directly by other layers of government – such as state, regional or local – or just voluntarily followed by citizens and corporates, enabling them to save money while showing solidarity with the people of Ukraine.

The IEA report notes that reducing oil use must not remain a temporary measure. Sustained reductions are important not only to improve countries’ energy security but also to tackle climate change and reduce air pollution. Governments have all the necessary tools at their disposal to put oil demand into decline in the coming years, and the report sets out the key ones to achieve this goal, including hastening the adoption of electric vehicles, raising fuel economy standards, boosting alternative fuel supplies, accelerating heat pump deployment, and producing and consuming plastic more sustainably.
The electricity system in Moldova is characterised by its reliance on imports, which supplied 69% of demand in 2020. Renewable electricity accounted for just over 12% of domestic generation, though there remains over 27 GW of potential renewable generation capacity via wind, solar, biomass and hydro.

To provide Moldovan policymakers at all levels with a vision towards a clean, secure and modern electricity system, the International Energy Agency today launched a policy roadmap on System Integration of Renewables for Moldova.

The Roadmap was presented along with the Ministry of Infrastructure and Regional Development, featuring input from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Hitachi and WindEurope. It was developed as part of the IEA’s work through the EU4Energy Programme.

The Roadmap examines tangible steps the government can take to enhance the power system and facilitate investment in renewables, removing barriers to deployment and establishing flexible electricity markets with strengthened regional coordination.

Developing renewable electricity would not only help Moldova achieve its National Energy Strategy and increase the country’s energy security, but would also bring significant socioeconomic and environmental benefits. By encouraging investment in renewables, Moldova could reduce its reliance on imported natural gas while maximising the consumption of domestic energy resources. Other benefits include reducing health problems from air pollution and providing green jobs, particularly in rural areas.
Periods of energy disruption, like the one we are seeing today, offer an opening for disruptive technologies. A helping hand for clean energy start-ups can help respond to the current energy crisis while also accelerating progress towards climate targets. A new IEA report released today, on How Governments Support Clean Energy Start-Ups, provides a timely review of the different approaches taken in countries around the world as they seek to become home to the next Tesla, BYD or Vestas.

Money is now pouring into small companies with big ideas for improving our energy systems and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Innovators including Addionics, Evage, H2Pro, Kula Bio and PassiveLogic have raised more than USD 25 million each since the start of 2022. New technologies are coming from a wide range of different research efforts and countries. Energy technologies are becoming more digital, electronic, consumer-focused and modular. Some of the world’s brightest and most creative minds are engaged in building the cornerstones of tomorrow’s clean energy system.

In many cases, measures and programmes put in place by governments have laid the foundations for success in this sector, which is sometimes referred to as “cleantech” or, more recently, “climate tech”. Public sector support to help start-ups get new clean energy technologies to the market has risen sharply since the Paris Agreement was signed in 2015.

These support measures are important – not because civil servants are good substitutes for venture capitalists, but because governments possess a range of unique resources that energy technology start-ups need for success. Drawing on 14 detailed country case studies and 23 in-depth interviews, the new IEA analysis highlights the ways in which governments have stepped in. This includes, for example, providing access to patient providers of capital and world-class laboratories, mentoring and peer-to-peer networking, and targeting technologies or groups that can face additional obstacles to break through, including female entrepreneurs.

The examples in the new report come from a wide range of countries: Chile, India, Morocco and Singapore have inspiring policy designs to share, alongside examples from Canada, Germany, Norway, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States and others.

Overall government support to clean energy innovation has picked up in recent years, spurred by the pursuit of net zero goals and efforts to stimulate economic recovery from the pandemic. Examples include the Japan Green Innovation Fund, the US Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and many initiatives in Europe and elsewhere.

If history is any guide, today’s elevated fossil fuel prices and energy security concerns could further bolster the priority governments are attaching to clean energy innovation. This was the case following the oil shocks of the early 1970s. Between 1974 and 1980, IEA member governments more than doubled their spending on non-fossil public energy research and development. Between the mid-1990s and early 2010s, they increased it by over 70% as oil prices rose again.

In the new report, the IEA gives practical guidance on how governments can create thriving energy innovation ecosystems, alongside their more traditional role in providing direct funding for energy research and development and large-scale demonstration projects. All of these approaches will be crucial to meet today’s energy security and climate imperatives while also creating lasting value in terms of economic activity and employment.
The IEA’s new Clean Energy Labour Council held its first meeting today, bringing together leading trade union figures and other important voices from around the world to foster stronger dialogue on how governments can ensure clean energy transitions are people-centred and inclusive.



Convened by IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol, the Council’s members comprise representatives of the world’s most important national trade unions and trade union confederations, as well as prominent thinkers on the topic. It complements the IEA’s existing Energy Business Council, which promotes exchanges between the Agency, the business community and policy makers.

Today’s livestreamed meeting was co-chaired by Sharan Burrow, General Secretary of the International Trade Union Confederation, and Bheki Ntshalintshali, General Secretary of the Congress of South African Trade Unions. It provided an opportunity for all members to introduce their perspectives on the key labour issues affecting clean energy transitions. The full video of the meeting is available to watch below.



“The IEA’s dialogue with the energy industry has helped inform our work, and I believe the perspectives of our Clean Energy Labour Council will equally provide valuable input,” Dr Birol told participants in the meeting. “While our analysis shows that the transition will create millions more jobs than will be lost, we must limit the impacts on affected communities and ensure proper training and skills for the jobs of the future. Governments have the scope to do much more to ensure their clean energy transition plans are truly people-centred and inclusive.”



The Labour Council builds off the work of the Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions, an independent group convened by Dr Birol last year including heads of government, ministers and thought leaders. The Global Commission produced 12 key actionable recommendations aimed at enabling citizens to benefit from the opportunities and navigate the disruptions created by clean energy transitions.

Jobs, skills development, training, social dialogue were key themes of the Global Commission’s Recommendationsand will be explored further by this new Council, which will give a greater voice to the labour perspective in energy and climate policymaking.

In the pathway the IEA set out last year for reaching net zero emissions globally by 2050, increases in clean energy employment more than offset declines in fossil fuel sectors, resulting in a net increase of nearly 9 million jobs. A further 16 million jobs could be created in related fields such as efficient appliances, building retrofits, and electric and fuel cell vehicles.

However, these new opportunities would not necessarily be in the same places where jobs are lost while the skills they require may be considerably different. This is true both within specific countries and internationally. Even when the number of energy industry jobs lost is small, the impact on the local economy can be significant. And the new jobs can only be filled if workers have the right skill sets.

Governments need to manage the impacts in a coordinated way, seeking transition pathways that maximise opportunities for decent, high-quality work and for workers to make use of existing skills, and mobilising long-term support for workers and communities where jobs are lost. The IEA Clean Energy Labour Council will examine these issues, giving a greater voice to the labour perspective in energy and climate policy making.
Following the unanimous decision on 1 March to make 60 million barrels available from emergency stocks, nearly 62.7 million barrels of emergency oil stocks are being made available collectively by IEA Member Countries.

As shown in the table below, over two-thirds of this is coming from public stocks (government or specialized agency-held stocks) and nearly one-third is from the lowering of stockholding obligations set on industry. The vast majority of the public stocks are in the form of crude oil, while the bulk of the oil available from lowering stockholding obligations is refined product.
Global energy-related carbon dioxide emissions rose by 6% in 2021 to 36.3 billion tonnes, their highest ever level, as the world economy rebounded strongly from the Covid-19 crisis and relied heavily on coal to power that growth, according to new IEA analysis released today.

The increase in global CO2 emissions of over 2 billion tonnes was the largest in history in absolute terms, more than offsetting the previous year’s pandemic-induced decline, the IEA analysis shows. The recovery of energy demand in 2021 was compounded by adverse weather and energy market conditions – notably the spikes in natural gas prices – which led to more coal being burned despite renewable power generation registering its largest ever growth.

The global CO2 emissions and energy demand numbers are based on the IEA’s detailed region-by-region and fuel-by-fuel analysis, drawing on the latest official national data and publicly available energy, economic and weather data. Combined with the methane emissions estimates that the IEA published last month and estimates of nitrous oxide and flaring-related CO2 emissions, the new analysis shows that overall greenhouse gas emissions from energy rose to their highest ever level in 2021.

The numbers make clear that the global economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis has not been the sustainable recovery that IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol called for during the early stages of the pandemic in 2020. The world must now ensure that the global rebound in emissions in 2021 was a one-off – and that an accelerated energy transition contributes to global energy security and lower energy prices for consumers.

Coal accounted for over 40% of the overall growth in global CO2 emissions in 2021, reaching an all-time high of 15.3 billion tonnes. CO2 emissions from natural gas rebounded well above their 2019 levels to 7.5 billion tonnes. At 10.7 billion tonnes, CO2 emissions from oil remained significantly below pre-pandemic levels because of the limited recovery in global transport activity in 2021, mainly in the aviation sector.

Despite the rebound in coal use, renewable energy sources and nuclear power provided a higher share of global electricity generation than coal in 2021. Renewables-based generation reached an all-time high, exceeding 8 000 terawatt-hours (TWh) in 2021, a record 500 TWh above its 2020 level. Output from wind and solar PV increased by 270 TWh and 170 TWh, respectively, while hydro generation declined due to the impacts of drought, notably in the United States and Brazil.

The use of coal for electricity generation in 2021 was intensified by record high natural gas prices. The costs of operating existing coal power plants across the United States and many European power systems were considerably lower than those of gas power plants for the majority of 2021. Gas-to-coal switching pushed up global CO2 emissions from electricity generation by well over 100 million tonnes, notably in the United States and Europe where competition between gas and coal power plants is tightest.

The rebound of global CO2 emissions above pre-pandemic levels has largely been driven by China, where they increased by 750 million tonnes between 2019 and 2021. China was the only major economy to experience economic growth in both 2020 and 2021. The emissions increases in those two years in China more than offset the aggregate decline in the rest of the world over the same period. In 2021, China’s CO2 emissions rose above 11.9 billion tonnes, accounting for 33% of the global total.

China’s rise in emissions resulted largely from a sharp increase in electricity demand that leaned heavily on coal power. With rapid GDP growth and additional electrification of energy services, electricity demand in China grew by 10% in 2021, faster than economic growth at 8.4%. This increase in demand of almost 700 TWh was the largest ever experienced in China. With demand growth outstripping the increase in supply from low emissions sources, coal was used to meet more than half of the rise in electricity demand. This was despite the country also seeing its largest ever increase in renewable power output in 2021.

CO2 emissions in India rebounded strongly in 2021 to rise above 2019 levels, driven by growth in coal use for electricity generation. Coal-fired generation reached an all-time high in India, jumping 13% above its 2020 level. This was partly because the growth of renewables slowed to one-third of the average rate seen over the previous five years.

Global economic output in advanced economies recovered to pre-pandemic levels in 2021, but CO2 emissions rebounded less sharply, signalling a more permanent trajectory of structural decline. CO2 emissions in the United States in 2021 were 4% below their 2019 level. In the European Union, they were 2.4% lower. In Japan, emissions dropped by 3.7% in 2020 and rebounded by less than 1% in 2021.

On a per capita basis, CO2 emissions in advanced economies have fallen to 8.2 tonnes on average and are now below the average of 8.4 tonnes in China, although wide differences remain among advanced economies.
IEA Member Countries unanimously agreed on 1 March to an initial emergency response plan to alleviate the increasing tightness in oil markets resulting from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. IEA Member Countries agreed to make 60 million barrels of their emergency oil stocks available to the market. In the last few days since the decision, each IEA Member Country has been considering how much it could contribute to the announced response plan, given its domestic circumstances. The commitments submitted by Members actually surpassed 60 million barrels, demonstrating great solidarity.

“The decision taken to release emergency stocks – for only the 4th time in the IEA’s history – has sent a strong message that IEA Members are unified in support of Ukraine and will do all they can to provide stability to the market during these difficult days,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “Events in Ukraine remain deeply distressing and the impacts on energy markets are becoming more pronounced. We continue to monitor the situation closely. If necessary, we are ready to recommend additional steps to build on this initial release.”

IEA Member Countries hold 1.5 billion barrels in public reserves and about 575 million barrels under obligations with industry. Therefore, this initial response of 61.7 million barrels represents just 3% of total emergency reserves.

Emergency oil stocks in IEA member countries are either in the form of public stocks (government-owned or by specialised agencies), or stocks held by industry under an obligation of the government. In the case of public stocks, these can be released via tenders or loans to the market, which will be launched and released over the coming weeks depending on the specific stockholding system in each country. In the case of obligated industry stocks, obligations will be lowered, via legislative decrees or administrative mandates, to make the volumes available for consumption. This can take a matter of days.

The following table shows the breakdown of the oil to be made available by each of the participating countries. More details will be made available in due course on the breakdown of the pledged barrels in crude and products, and public and obligated industry stocks.
The European Union could reduce its imports of Russian natural gas by more than one-third within a year through a combination of measures that would be consistent with the European Green Deal and support energy security and affordability, new IEA analysis shows.

Europe’s reliance on imported natural gas from Russia has again been thrown into sharp relief by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The IEA’s 10-Point Plan to Reduce the European Union’s Reliance on Russian Natural Gas includes a range of complementary actions that can be taken in the coming months, such as turning more to other suppliers, drawing on other energy sources and accelerating efforts to provide consumers, businesses and industry with the means to use clean and efficient alternatives to natural gas. The proposed measures are fully consistent with the EU’s European Green Deal and its Fit for 55 package, paving the way for further emissions reductions in the years to come.

In 2021, the European Union imported 155 billion cubic metres of natural gas from Russia, accounting for around 45% of EU gas imports and close to 40% of its total gas consumption. Progress towards Europe’s net zero ambitions will bring down its use and imports of gas over time, but today’s crisis raises the specific question about imports from Russia and what more can be done in the immediate future to bring them down.

“Nobody is under any illusions anymore. Russia’s use of its natural gas resources as an economic and political weapon show Europe needs to act quickly to be ready to face considerable uncertainty over Russian gas supplies next winter,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “The IEA’s 10-Point Plan provides practical steps to cut Europe’s reliance on Russian gas imports by over a third within a year while supporting the shift to clean energy in a secure and affordable way. Europe needs to rapidly reduce the dominant role of Russia in its energy markets and ramp up the alternatives as quickly as possible.”

Barbara Pompili, Minister for Ecological Transition of France, which currently holds the EU Presidency, said: “More than ever, getting rid of Russian fossil fuels and of fossil fuels in general, is essential. What is at stake is both the need to accelerate the fight against climate change, and, as we can see now, the short-term energy security of the European continent. The 10-Point Plan proposed by the IEA today will enrich our thinking. We will look at these proposals in detail, as the French President announced yesterday a broad resilience plan for France. As part of this plan, my administration is working on a set of measures to ensure the robustness of our energy system, which will certainly echo the propositions of the IEA."

Kadri Simson, European Commissioner for Energy, said: “Reducing our dependence on Russian gas is a strategic imperative for the European Union. In recent years, we have already significantly diversified our supply, building LNG terminals and new interconnectors. But Russia’s attack on Ukraine is a watershed moment. Next week, the Commission will propose a pathway for Europe to become independent from Russian gas as soon as possible. The IEA’s analysis outlines a number of concrete steps we can take towards that goal. It is a very timely and valuable contribution to our work.”

The key actions recommended in the IEA’s 10-Point Plan include not signing any new gas contracts with Russia; maximising gas supplies from other sources; accelerating the deployment of solar and wind; making the most of existing low emissions energy sources, such as nuclear and renewables; and ramping up energy efficiency measures in homes and businesses.

Taken together, these steps could reduce the European Union’s imports of Russian gas by more than 50 billion cubic metres, or over one-third, within a year, the IEA estimates. This takes into account the need for additional refilling of European gas storage facilities in 2022. Many of the actions recommended in the plan – including stepping up energy efficiency measures, accelerating renewable deployment and expanding low emissions sources of power system flexibility – are key elements of the IEA’s Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050.

The IEA analysis notes that other avenues are available to the EU if it wishes or needs to reduce reliance on Russian gas even more quickly – but with significant trade-offs. The major near-term option would involve switching away from gas consumption in the power sector via increased use of Europe’s coal-fired fleet or by using alternative fuels, such as oil, within existing gas-fired power plants.

Given that these alternatives to gas use are not aligned with the European Green Deal, they are not included in the 10-Point Plan described above. They may also be costly from an economic point of view. However, they could displace large volumes of gas relatively quickly. If the fuel-switching option were to be fully exercised in addition to the complete implementation of the 10-Point Plan described above, it would result in a total annual reduction in EU imports of gas from Russia of more than 80 billion cubic metres, or over half, while still resulting in a modest decline in overall emissions.

Reducing reliance on Russian gas will not be simple for the EU, requiring a concerted and sustained policy effort across multiple sectors, alongside strong international dialogue on energy markets and security. There are multiple links between Europe’s policy choices and broader global market balances. Strengthened international collaboration with alternative pipeline and LNG exporters – and with other major gas importers and consumers – will be critical. Clear communication between governments, industry and consumers is also an essential element for successful implementation. As the world’s leading energy authority, the IEA will continue to serve as a focal point for global dialogue on how to ensure a secure and sustainable energy future.
The 31 Member Countries of the Governing Board of the International Energy Agency agreed to release 60 million barrels of oil from their emergency reserves to send a unified and strong message to global oil markets that there will be no shortfall in supplies as a result of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.



Today’s Extraordinary Governing Board meeting, held at the Ministerial level, was chaired by US Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm in her capacity as Chair of this year’s IEA Ministerial Meeting.

During today’s meeting, Ministers expressed solidarity with the people of Ukraine and their democratically elected government in the face of Russia’s appalling and unprovoked violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

The IEA Ministers noted with concern the energy security impacts of the egregious actions by Russia, and voiced support for sanctions imposed by the international community in response.

The Ministers noted that Russia’s invasion comes against a backdrop of already tight global oil markets, heightened price volatility, commercial inventories that are at their lowest level since 2014, and a limited ability of producers to provide additional supply in the short term.

“It is heartening to see how quickly the global community has united to condemn Russia’s actions and respond decisively,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “I am pleased that the IEA has also come together today to take action. The situation in energy markets is very serious and demands our full attention. Global energy security is under threat, putting the world economy at risk during a fragile stage of the recovery.”

“I am grateful that IEA member countries made available the initial 60 million barrels to provide stability to oil markets,” Dr Birol added. “I am also happy that our member countries committed to do their utmost to support Ukraine in terms of fuel supply. At the invitation of the Governing Board, I am also looking forward to welcoming Ukraine Energy Minister German Galushchenko as a special guest to our forthcoming Ministerial Meeting later this month.”

IEA members hold emergency stockpiles of 1.5 billion barrels. The announcement of an initial release of 60 million barrels, or 4% of those stockpiles, is equivalent to 2 million barrels a day for 30 days. The coordinated drawdown is the fourth in the history of the IEA, which was created in 1974. Previous collective actions were taken in 2011, 2005 and 1991.



Russia plays an outsized role on global energy markets. It is the world’s third largest oil producer and the largest exporter. Its exports of about 5 million barrels a day of crude oil represent roughly 12% of global trade – and its approximately 2.85 million barrels a day of petroleum products represent around 15% of global refined product trade. Around 60% of Russia’s oil exports go to Europe and another 20% to China.



The Ministers resolved today that energy supply should not be used as a means of political coercion nor as a threat to national and international security. The IEA Secretariat will continue to closely monitor global oil and gas markets and to provide recommendations to the Governing Board, including possible additional emergency oil stock draws, as needed.

The Governing Board also encouraged each member country to do its utmost to support Ukraine in the supply of oil products, recommending that governments and consumers maintain and intensify conservation efforts.

Ministers also discussed Europe’s significant reliance on Russian natural gas and the need to reduce this by looking to other suppliers, including via LNG, and to continue to pursue a well-managed acceleration of clean energy transitions. On Thursday, the IEA Secretariat will release a 10-Point Plan for how European countries can reduce their reliance on Russian gas supplies by next winter.
Today I convened a meeting to bring together representatives of the IEA’s 31 Member Countries to share perspectives on Russia's invasion of Ukraine, and to discuss the impacts on global energy markets and how IEA Member Countries can continue to play a stabilizing role.

Our first thoughts go to the people of Ukraine. We expressed great concern over the destruction and loss of life – and hope that peace will be restored soon. We reviewed how the Russian invasion has increased concerns among oil market participants against the backdrop of already tight global markets and heightened price volatility. We discussed options the IEA could take over the coming days and weeks. Similarly, we discussed the situation in natural gas markets and how any disruption to Russian supplies via Ukraine would put further pressure on Europe, with flow on effects to the rest of the world.

Given these initial impacts on energy markets, and the risks that they may escalate, we discussed the possibility of holding an extraordinary IEA Governing Board meeting at the Ministerial level, and agreed to continue to closely monitor the evolving situation, to consult closely over the coming days, and to continue to act in solidarity to ensure global energy security.
Global methane emissions from the energy sector are about 70% greater than the amount national governments have officially reported, according to new IEA analysis released today, underlining the urgent need for enhanced monitoring efforts and stronger policy action to drive down emissions of the potent greenhouse gas.

Methane is responsible for around 30% of the rise in global temperatures since the Industrial Revolution, and quick and sustained emission reductions are key to limiting near-term warming and improving air quality. Methane dissipates faster than carbon dioxide (CO2) but is a much more powerful greenhouse gas during its short lifespan, meaning that cutting methane emissions would have a rapid effect on limiting global warming.

The energy sector accounts for around 40% of methane emissions from human activity, and this year’s expanded edition of the IEA’s Global Methane Tracker includes country-by-country emissions from coal mines and bioenergy for the first time, in addition to continued detailed coverage of oil and natural gas operations. Methane emissions from the energy sector grew by just under 5% last year. This did not bring them back to their 2019 levels and slightly lagged the rise in overall energy use, indicating that some efforts to limit emissions may already be paying off.

“At today’s elevated natural gas prices, nearly all of the methane emissions from oil and gas operations worldwide could be avoided at no net cost,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “The International Energy Agency has been a longstanding champion of stronger action to cut methane emissions. A vital part of those efforts is transparency on the size and location of the emissions, which is why the massive underreporting revealed by our Global Methane Tracker is so alarming.”

Last year, significant emissions were confirmed in Texas and parts of Central Asia, with Turkmenistan alone responsible for one-third of large emissions events seen by satellites in 2021. Relatively few major leaks were detected for the major onshore oil and gas producers in the Middle East.

Satellites have greatly increased the world’s knowledge of emission sources, and the IEA Global Methane Tracker incorporates the latest readings from satellites and other science-based measurement campaigns. While measured data continues to improve, the coverage provided by satellites is still far from complete: existing satellites do not provide measurements over equatorial regions, offshore operations, or northern areas such as the main Russian oil and gas producing areas.

Yet uncertainty over emissions levels is no reason to delay action on methane. Major reductions can be achieved with known technologies and with tried and tested policies that have been proven to work effectively. The Global Methane Tracker includes a new detailed policy explorer that provides examples of effective implementation and shows where these policies could be most impactful.

If all methane leaks from fossil fuel operations in 2021 had been captured and sold, then natural gas markets would have been supplied with an additional 180 billion cubic metres of natural gas. That is equivalent to all the gas used in Europe’s power sector and more than enough to ease today’s market tightness.

The intensity of methane emissions from fossil fuel operations range widely from country to country: the best performing countries and companies are over 100 times better than the worst. Global methane emissions from oil and gas operations would fall by more than 90% if all producing countries matched Norway’s emissions intensity, the lowest worldwide.

The Global Methane Pledge, launched in November by more than 110 countries at the COP26 Climate Change Conference in Glasgow, marked an important step forward. Led by the European Union and the United States, its participants agreed to reduce methane emissions from human activities – including agriculture, the energy sector and other sources – by 30% by 2030. However, more major emitters need to join. Of the five countries with the largest methane emissions from their energy sectors – China, Russia, the United States, Iran and India – only the United States is part of the Pledge as things stand.

“The Global Methane Pledge must become a landmark moment in the world’s efforts to drive down emissions,” said Dr Birol. “Cutting global methane emissions from human activities by 30% by the end of this decade would have the same effect on global warming by 2050 as shifting the entire transport sector to net zero CO2 emissions.”
The IEA is monitoring with growing concern Russia's recent statements and actions, and their potential implications for energy markets. The Agency is continuing its consultations with its Member Countries and key partners on appropriate measures to ensure energy security.

While the specific impact on world oil markets is yet to be determined, IEA Member Countries stand ready to act collectively to ensure that global oil markets are adequately supplied.

Most immediately at risk are the roughly 250 kb/d of Russian oil exports transiting Ukraine via the southern branch of the Druzhba pipeline to supply Hungary, Slovakia and the Czech Republic. These countries have ample government held emergency stocks to draw upon in case of need. The IEA will continue to monitor the market closely and assess the need for activating its emergency oil system.

Total oil stocks in IEA Member Countries amounted to close to 4.16 billion barrels as of end-December 2021, of which 1.5 billion barrels are held by governments as emergency reserves. IEA net-oil-importing countries have an obligation to hold emergency oil stocks equivalent to at least 90 days of their net oil imports. For more information on IEA stockholding requirements and emergency response measures, please click here.

The IEA is also closely monitoring the developments in natural gas markets and will continue its consultations with Member Countries, Association countries and key producing countries to facilitate market stability.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol visited Cairo on 14 February, delivering an opening keynote speech at the EGYPS 2022 international energy conference to a high-level audience including Egyptian President Abdel Fattah Al-Sisi, members of the Egyptian Cabinet and leading figures from a range of governments and global organisations. Dr Birol also held bilateral meetings with several Egyptian Government Ministers and other officials. The visit came at an important time for energy and climate issues in Egypt, which will host the COP27 Climate Change Conference in November and is moving towards closer ties with the IEA.

In his speech, Dr Birol highlighted several notable recent achievements in the Egyptian energy sector. This includes a serious effort to reform subsidies that has unlocked private and international investment, allowed the country to diversify its power mix, and enabled it to launch an ambitious renewable energy programme spearheaded by solar power.

The mission to Cairo also provided the opportunity for Dr Birol to hold meetings with key Ministers from the Government of Egypt, which recently submitted a formal request to become an IEA Association country. (The IEA currently has eight Association countries comprising prominent emerging economies from across the globe. Dr Birol’s bilateral meetings with Minister of Petroleum Tarek El-Molla, Minister of Electricity and Renewable Energy Shaker El-Markabi, Minister of Environment Yasmine Fouad and Assistant Secretary for Foreign Affairs Hisham Seifeldin, addressed possible areas for future cooperation, including hydrogen, renewables integration, energy efficiency and technical support for Egypt’s upcoming Presidency of COP27.

While in Cairo, Dr Birol also met with Israel’s Minister of Energy Karine Elharrar to discuss recent energy market dynamics and hear an update on Israel’s process of accession to the IEA. In addition, he had bilateral conversations with Amani Abou-Zeid, the African Union Commissioner for Infrastructure and Energy, and Mohammed Barkindo, the Secretary General of OPEC, among others.
Brazil’s freight sector has numerous opportunities to use energy more efficiently, reduce carbon emissions and improve air quality by taking steps such as replacing older trucks, improving fuel economy and investing in rail and roads, according to a joint study by the IEA and Brazil’s Energy Research Office EPE.

This year’s Atlas of Energy Efficiency includes a special focus on the road freight sector, providing an overview of how the sector has developed over the past two decades, how policies have influenced energy consumption and emissions, and where opportunities lie for further progress.

Brazil has some of the largest trucks in the world, with heavy trucks playing a critical role in hauling agricultural commodities and accounting for 60% of total freight energy use in the country. Over the past two decades, the efficiency of Brazil’s trucks has improved thanks to policies to spur innovation in the auto industry, modernise roads, restrict emissions and advance alternative fuels.

At the same time, Brazil can further benefit by building on existing policies and drawing on international experience. For example, 6% of trucks are over 30 years old, and replacing these would significantly reduce consumption and emissions. The chapter provides an overview of how scrappage schemes, fuel economy standards and investments across road, rail and water freight have advanced efficiency in selected countries.

For the third consecutive year, the IEA has contributed to the Atlas of Energy Efficiency, Brazil’s annual reference point for energy efficiency policies that is published by the EPE (short for Empresa de Pesquisa Energética), which supports the Ministry of Mines and Energy. The report underscores the ongoing cooperation between the IEA and EPE. Brazil is a key partner in the IEA’s Energy Efficiency in Emerging Economies (E4) programme, which seeks to build capacity within, and support for, energy efficiency improvements in some of the world’s largest energy-consuming countries.

A more in-depth analysis of the Brazilian freight sector is available in Road Freight Transport: International Benchmarking.
Brazil’s pulp and paper industry is in a strong position to build on efforts towards electrification, energy efficiency, recycling and technological innovation in order to further reduce energy use and cut emissions, according to a joint report by Brazil’s Energy Research Office EPE and the International Energy Agency supported by the Brazilian Tree Industry association Ibá.

The EPE, which advises Brazil’s Ministry of Mines and Energy, and the IEA, are releasing the report today in both English and Portuguese. It presents the latest analysis of energy consumption trends and opportunities for energy and emission savings in Brazil’s pulp and paper industry, one of the country’s leading industrial sectors. Brazil is the second largest pulp producer in the world after the United States, accounting for more than 11% of global production, and is one of the world’s top exporters. Brazil is also among the 10 largest paper producers in the world.

The sector is also one of Brazil’s biggest energy consumers. In 2020, pulp and paper production accounted for 16% of final industrial energy consumption in the country, well above the 5.3% share that the industry has at a global level. This makes it a crucial sector for Brazil’s efforts to use energy more efficiently and reduce emissions. The new report provides an overview of the pulp and paper sector’s consumption trends and energy sources, as well as practices such as recycling and increasing the share of renewable resources during production, both in Brazil and in key countries and regions.

The report reflects the ongoing cooperation between the IEA and the EPE (short for Empresa de Pesquisa Energética), which have worked together to study other Brazilian economic sectors such as road freight and cement. It also shows the IEA’s engagement with other leading Brazilian institutions, such as Ibá (short for Indústria Brasileira de Árvores), with which the IEA has strengthened communication and data exchanges. Brazil is a key partner in the IEA’s Energy Efficiency in Emerging Economies (E4) programme, which seeks to build capacity within, and support for, energy efficiency improvements in some of the world’s largest energy-consuming countries.

A more in-depth analysis of trends and opportunities for efficiency and emissions reductions in the pulp and paper sectors is underway.
Global electricity demand surged in 2021, creating strains in major markets, pushing prices to unprecedented levels and driving the power sector’s emissions to a record high. Electricity is central to modern life and clean electricity is pivotal to energy transitions, but in the absence of faster structural change in the sector, rising demand over the next three years could result in additional market volatility and continued high emissions, according an IEA report released today.

Driven by the rapid economic rebound, and more extreme weather conditions than in 2020, including a colder than average winter, last year’s 6% rise in global electricity demand was the largest in percentage terms since 2010 when the world was recovering from the global financial crisis. In absolute terms, last year’s increase of over 1 500 terawatt-hours was the largest ever, according to the January 2022 edition of the IEA’s semi-annual Electricity Market Report.

The steep increase in demand outstripped the ability of sources of electricity supply to keep pace in some major markets, with shortages of natural gas and coal leading to volatile prices, demand destruction and negative effects on power generators, retailers and end users, notably in China, Europe and India. Around half of last year’s global growth in electricity demand took place in China, where demand grew by an estimated 10%. China and India suffered from power cuts at certain points in the second half of the year because of coal shortages.

“Sharp spikes in electricity prices in recent times have been causing hardship for many households and businesses around the world and risk becoming a driver of social and political tensions,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “Policy makers should be taking action now to soften the impacts on the most vulnerable and to address the underlying causes. Higher investment in low-carbon energy technologies including renewables, energy efficiency and nuclear power – alongside an expansion of robust and smart electricity grids – can help us get out of today’s difficulties.”

The IEA’s price index for major wholesale electricity markets almost doubled compared with 2020 and was up 64% from the 2016-2020 average. In Europe, average wholesale electricity prices in the fourth quarter of 2021 were more than four times their 2015-2020 average. Besides Europe, there were also sharp price increases in Japan and India, while they were more moderate in the United States where gas supplies were less perturbed.

Electricity produced from renewable sources grew by 6% in 2021, but it was not enough to keep up with galloping demand. Coal-fired generation grew by 9%, serving more than half of the increase in demand and reaching a new all-time peak as high natural gas prices led to gas-to-coal switching. Gas-fired generation grew by 2%, while nuclear increased by 3.5%, almost reaching its 2019 levels. In total, carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from power generation rose by 7%, also reaching a record high, after having declined the two previous years.

“Emissions from electricity need to decline by 55% by 2030 to meet our Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario, but in the absence of major policy action from governments, those emissions are set to remain around the same level for the next three years,” said Dr Birol. “Not only does this highlight how far off track we currently are from a pathway to net zero emissions by 2050, but it also underscores the massive changes needed for the electricity sector to fulfil its critical role in decarbonising the broader energy system.”

For 2022-2024, the report anticipates electricity demand growing 2.7% a year on average, although the Covid-19 pandemic and high energy prices bring some uncertainty to this outlook. Renewables are set to grow by 8% per year on average, serving more than 90% of net demand growth during this period. We expect nuclear-based generation to grow by 1% annually during the same period.

As a consequence of slowing electricity demand growth and significant renewables additions, fossil fuel-based generation is expected to stagnate in the coming years, with coal-fired generation falling slightly as phase-outs and declining competitiveness in the United States and Europe are balanced by growth in markets like China and India. Gas-fired generation is seen growing by around 1% a year.
Canada has embarked on an ambitious transformation of its energy system, and clear policy signals will be important to expand energy sector investments in clean and sustainable energy sources, according to a policy review by the International Energy Agency.

Since the IEA’s last in-depth review in 2015, Canada has made a series of international and domestic climate change commitments, notably setting a target to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 40-45% from 2005 levels by 2030 and a commitment to reach net zero emissions by 2050.

To support those climate and energy targets, governments in Canada have in recent years worked on a number of policy measures, including an ambitious carbon-pricing system, a clean fuels standard, a commitment to phase out unabated coal-fired electricity by 2030, nuclear plant extensions, methane regulations in the oil and gas sector, energy efficiency programmes and measures to decarbonise the transport sector.

“Canada has shown impressive leadership, both at home and abroad, on clean and equitable energy transitions,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol, who is launching the report today with Jonathan Wilkinson, Canada’s Minister of Natural Resources. “Canada’s wealth of clean electricity and its innovative spirit can help drive a secure and affordable transformation of its energy system and help realise its ambitious goals. Equally important, Canada’s efforts to reduce emissions – of both carbon dioxide and methane – from its oil and gas production can help ensure its continued place as a reliable supplier of energy to the world.”

Canada’s profile as a major producer, consumer and exporter of energy presents both challenges and opportunities for reaching the country’s enhanced targets. Energy makes up 10% of gross domestic product and is a major source of capital investment, export revenue and jobs. Moreover, Canada’s highly decentralised system of government means that close coordination between federal, provincial and territorial governments is essential for a successful energy transition.

“This report acknowledges Canada’s ambitious efforts and historic investments to develop pathways to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050 and ensure a transition that aligns with our shared objective of limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius, “ said Minister Wilkinson. “These are pathways that make the most sense for our people, our economy and our country and will also yield technology, products and know-how that can be exported and applied around the world.”

The IEA finds that emissions intensity from Canada’s oil and gas production has declined in recent years, but the sector remains a major source of greenhouse gases, accounting for about a quarter of the country’s GHG emissions. Along with strong action to curb methane emissions, improving the rate of energy technology innovation will be essential for the deep decarbonisation that is needed in oil and gas production, as well as in the transport and industry sectors. Canada is actively advancing innovation in a number of key fields, including carbon capture, utilisation and storage; clean hydrogen; and small modular nuclear reactors, with a view to serving as a supplier of energy and climate solutions to the world. The IEA notes that further federal support for research, development and demonstration would help accelerate progress towards these goals.

The IEA is also recommending that Canada’s federal government promote a comprehensive energy efficiency strategy in consultation with provinces and territories that sets clear targets for energy efficiency in the buildings, industry and transport sectors

The IEA report highlights that Canada’s electricity supply is among the cleanest in the world, with over 80% of supply coming from non-emitting sources, thanks to the dominance of hydro and the important role of nuclear. To further support the expansion of clean power and electrification, the report encourages increased interconnections among provinces and territories to ensure balanced decarbonisation progress across the country.

The IEA commends Canada on its efforts to advance a people-centred approach to its clean energy transition, including initiatives to promote diversity and inclusion in clean energy sectors; programmes to increase access to clean energy in northern, remote and Indigenous communities; and actions to enable just transitions for coal workers and their communities.

“Canada has laid out a comprehensive set of policy measures and investments across sectors to meet its climate targets, including a strong clean energy component to its Covid-19 economic recovery efforts,” said Dr Birol. “I hope this report will help Canada navigate its path toward economy-wide emissions reductions and a net zero future.”
The amount of electricity generated worldwide from coal is surging towards a new annual record in 2021, undermining efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and potentially putting global coal demand on course for an all-time high next year, the International Energy Agency said in its latest annual market report.



After falling in 2019 and 2020, global power generation from coal is expected to jump by 9% in 2021 to an all-time high of 10,350 terawatt-hours, according to the IEA’s Coal 2021 report, which was released today. The rebound is being driven by this year’s rapid economic recovery, which has pushed up electricity demand much faster than low-carbon supplies can keep up. The steep rise in natural gas prices has also increased demand for coal power by making it more cost-competitive.



Overall coal demand worldwide – including uses beyond power generation, such as cement and steel production – is forecast to grow by 6% in 2021. That increase will not take it above the record levels it reached in 2013 and 2014. But, depending on weather patterns and economic growth, overall coal demand could reach new all-time highs as soon as 2022 and remain at that level for the following two years, underscoring the need for fast and strong policy action.

“Coal is the single largest source of global carbon emissions, and this year’s historically high level of coal power generation is a worrying sign of how far off track the world is in its efforts to put emissions into decline towards net zero,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “Without strong and immediate actions by governments to tackle coal emissions – in a way that is fair, affordable and secure for those affected – we will have little chance, if any at all, of limiting global warming to 1.5 °C.”

In China, where more than half of global coal-fired electricity generation takes place, coal power is expected to grow by 9% in 2021 despite a deceleration at the end of the year. In India, it is forecast to grow by 12%. This would set new all-time highs in both countries, even as they roll out impressive amounts of solar and wind capacity. While coal power generation is set to increase by almost 20% this year in the United States and the European Union, that is not enough to take it above 2019 levels. Coal use in those two markets is expected to go back into decline next year amid slow electricity demand growth and rapid expansion of renewable power.



“The pledges to reach net zero emissions made by many countries, including China and India, should have very strong implications for coal – but these are not yet visible in our near-term forecast, reflecting the major gap between ambitions and action,” said Keisuke Sadamori, Director of Energy Markets and Security at the IEA. “Asia dominates the global coal market, with China and India accounting for two-thirds of overall demand. These two economies – dependent on coal and with a combined population of almost 3 billion people – hold the key to future coal demand.”



In 2020, global coal demand fell by 4.4%, the largest decline in decades but much smaller than the annual drop that was initially expected at the height of the lockdowns early in the pandemic, the report shows. Regional disparities were large. Coal demand grew by 1% for the full year in China, where the economy began recovering much earlier than elsewhere, whereas it dropped by nearly 20% in the United States and the European Union, and by 8% in India and South Africa.

Coal prices have been on a rollercoaster ride over the past two years. After falling to USD 50 per tonne in the second quarter of 2020, they started to climb towards the end of the year, with supply cutbacks balancing the market before rebounds in economic activity and coal demand in China started pushing prices up. In 2021, prices were lifted further by demand outstripping supply in China – the global coal price setter – as well as by supply disruptions and higher natural gas prices globally. Coal prices reached all-time highs in early October 2021, with imported thermal coal in Europe, for example, hitting USD 298 per tonne. Quick policy intervention by the Chinese government to balance the market had a rapid effect on prices. As of mid-December, European prices were back below USD 150 per tonne.




IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol met this week with US Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm and other key leaders during a three-day visit to Washington to prepare for the Agency’s upcoming 2022 Ministerial Meeting and to discuss recent efforts to accelerate clean energy transitions.

Energy Secretary Granholm will chair the IEA Ministerial on 2-3 February 2022. At their meeting this week, the two discussed how to turn climate ambitions into concrete clean energy actions. Among the areas of focus at the IEA Ministerial will be the policy actions countries need to take to follow through on their net zero pledges. The Ministerial will also set the priorities for the IEA’s work in the coming years as it strengthens its leadership role on clean energy transitions.

Following his meeting with Secretary Granholm, Dr Birol met with other high-ranking officials at the US Department of Energy, including former IEA Deputy Executive Director David Turk who now serves as Deputy Energy Secretary.



In other meetings, Dr Birol met with Jose Fernandez, the Under Secretary of State for Economic Growth, Energy and Environment, and officials at the National Security Council, as well as leading figures from civil society and academia. He was hosted by a high-level panel at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a leading Washington-based think tank.



Dr Birol was also the lead speaker at a dinner debate at the Aspen Institute led by Jason Bordoff, co-founder of the Columbia Climate School. Among the 25 high-level guests were Senator Joe Manchin, several members of congress, and leaders from across the public and private sectors.

The visit follow’s Dr Birol weeklong trip to Washington in July, underscoring the US government’s renewed determination to show international leadership on clean energy and climate, the importance of these issues on the US policy agenda, and the IEA’s central role in providing a global platform for international collaboration.
The Energy Efficiency Hub – a global platform for collaboration aimed at delivering the social, economic and environmental benefits of more efficient use of energy – was launched on 1 December at an event hosted at the International Energy Agency in Paris.

The Hub’s initial 16 members are Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, the European Commission, France, Germany, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Russia, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom and the United States.

The Hub aims to facilitate government-to-government exchanges on efficiency policy, regulation and implementation, focusing on topics relevant to real-world challenges faced by its members. The launch event showcased digitalisation, efficient equipment and appliance deployment, best energy efficiency technologies, and energy management best practices as areas of collaboration.

“Hub Members span the globe, from East to West and from North to South, together accounting for over 60% of energy use and carbon dioxide emissions,” said Ulrich Benterbusch, Deputy Director General of the German Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy, who will serve as Chair of the Hub’s Steering Committee.

“In fact, each Member has significant accomplishments in energy efficiency and understands how urgent it is to work together on it,” he added. “Meeting global challenges requires all countries to do better, and – working in concert with other international organisations – the Hub will strive to share its work more broadly and to learn from others.”

The Hub’s launch follows the previous week’s release of Energy Efficiency 2021, the IEA’s annual market report on the subject, which showed that while global energy efficiency improvements are recovering to their pre-pandemic pace, they are still far short of what is needed to reach net zero emissions by 2050.

“I consider energy efficiency to be the very ‘first fuel’ because it is crucial to address climate change and make our energy supplies more secure while also leaving money in our pockets,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “I am very pleased to see countries coming together as part of the Energy Efficiency Hub to accelerate efforts in this critical area.”

“Being based at the IEA will enable the Hub to cooperate effectively with IEA experts and the other key initiatives and activities we host, including the Clean Energy Ministerial,” said Dr Birol. “The launch of the Hub is a clear and encouraging signal that momentum is building behind greater energy efficiency action worldwide.”

Brian Motherway, Head of Energy Efficiency at the IEA, said: “Governments need to work much harder if they are to deliver the full potential of energy efficiency and get their energy systems onto a pathway towards net zero. The Hub is an important instrument for countries to learn from each other and work together to strengthen their efficiency policies.”

To learn more, visit www.energyefficiencyhub.org and, to get in touch with the Hub Secretariat directly, write to Secretariat@energyefficiencyhub.org.
The growth of the world’s capacity to generate electricity from solar panels, wind turbines and other renewable technologies is on course to accelerate over the coming years, with 2021 expected to set a fresh all-time record for new installations, the IEA says in a new report.

Despite rising costs for key materials used to make solar panels and wind turbines, additions of new renewable power capacity this year are forecast to rise to 290 gigawatts (GW) in 2021, surpassing the previous all-time high set last year, according to the latest edition of the IEA’s annual Renewables Market Report.

By 2026, global renewable electricity capacity is forecast to rise more than 60% from 2020 levels to over 4 800 GW – equivalent to the current total global power capacity of fossil fuels and nuclear combined. Renewables are set to account for almost 95% of the increase in global power capacity through 2026, with solar PV alone providing more than half. The amount of renewable capacity added over the period of 2021 to 2026 is expected to be 50% higher than from 2015 to 2020. This is driven by stronger support from government policies and more ambitious clean energy goals announced before and during the COP26 Climate Change Conference.

“This year’s record renewable electricity additions of 290 gigawatts are yet another sign that a new global energy economy is emerging,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “The high commodity and energy prices we are seeing today pose new challenges for the renewable industry, but elevated fossil fuel prices also make renewables even more competitive.”

The growth of renewables is forecast to increase in all regions compared with the 2015-2020 period. China remains the global leader in the volume of capacity additions: it is expected to reach 1200 GW of total wind and solar capacity in 2026 – four years earlier than its current target of 2030. India is set to come top in terms of the rate of growth, doubling new installations compared with 2015-2020. Deployments in Europe and the United States are also on track to speed up significantly from the previous five years. These four markets together account for 80% of renewable capacity expansion worldwide.

“The growth of renewables in India is outstanding, supporting the government’s newly announced goal of reaching 500 GW of renewable power capacity by 2030 and highlighting India’s broader potential to accelerate its clean energy transition,” said Dr Birol. “China continues to demonstrate its clean energy strengths, with the expansion of renewables suggesting the country could well achieve a peak in its CO2 emissions well before 2030.”

Solar PV remains the powerhouse of growth in renewable electricity, with its capacity additions forecast to increase by 17% in 2021 to a new record of almost 160 GW. In the same time frame, onshore wind additions are set to be almost one-quarter higher on average than during the 2015-20 period. Total offshore wind capacity is forecast to more than triple by 2026.

The IEA report expects this record growth for renewables to take place despite today’s high commodity and transport prices. However, should commodity prices remain high through the end of next year, the cost of wind investments would go back up to levels last seen in 2015 and three years of cost reductions for solar PV would be erased.

Despite rising prices limiting growth, global biofuel demand in 2021 is forecast to surpass 2019 levels, rebounding from last year’s huge decline caused by the pandemic. Demand for biofuels is set to grow strongly to 2026, with Asia accounting for almost 30% of new production. India is expected to rise to become the third largest market for ethanol worldwide, behind the United States and Brazil.

Governments can further accelerate the growth of renewables by addressing key barriers, such as permitting and grid integration challenges, social acceptance issues, inconsistent policy approaches, and insufficient remuneration. High financing costs in the developing world are also a major obstacle. In the report’s accelerated case, which assumes some of these hurdles are overcome, average annual renewable capacity additions are one-quarter higher in the period to 2026 than is forecast in the main case.

However, even this faster deployment would still fall well short of what would be needed in a global pathway to net zero emissions by mid-century. That would require renewable power capacity additions over the period 2021-26 to average almost double the rate of the report’s main case. It would also mean growth in biofuels demand averaging four times higher than in the main case, and renewable heat demand almost three times higher.
France has helped guide international efforts to tackle climate change, but it needs to accelerate key parts of its energy transformation to meet its targets. The government is facing crucial decisions about its future energy mix, according a new policy review by the International Energy Agency.

The current rate of deployment of low-carbon energy technologies and energy efficiency solutions in France is not fast enough for the government to meet its energy and climate targets, calling for stronger policy efforts and increased investments, according to the IEA’s 2021 Energy Policy Review of France. In particular, the future development of the country’s electricity supply requires a clear policy strategy to be put in place.

France has demonstrated important leadership in raising global climate ambitions. It has done so within the framework of the European Union and, most notably, in its leading role in the negotiations that resulted in the landmark Paris Agreement in 2015.

At home, France was one of the first countries to enact a climate law, and in 2019, the government put into legislation the goal of reaching net zero emissions by 2050. France has promoted green finance and a green budgeting approach across government, aligning national expenditure and revenue processes with climate and other environmental goals. The government’s 2030 Investment Programme and its economic recovery plan are among the most ambitious globally in terms of clean energy transitions, with innovative funding schemes to encourage building retrofits and low-carbon transport.

In 2022, the government of France will need to take important decisions to ensure the country gets on track to meet its 2050 net zero emissions goal, notably in terms of plans to modernise its nuclear power fleet. The government will also have to step up its clean energy ambitions and measures for the coming years across the entire economy to align with the EU-wide goal of reducing emissions by 55% by 2030.

“France is approaching a crossroads, as key decisions on its future energy system need to be taken soon to ensure it can reach net zero emissions by 2050. By investing much more in energy efficiency, renewable energy and nuclear power, France can accelerate progress on its key energy and climate goals,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director, who is launching the report in Paris today with Barbara Pompili, France’s Minister for the Ecological Transition.

Energy efficiency is the central pillar of France’s National Low-Carbon Strategy, and the government is aiming to halve final energy consumption between 2012 and 2050. Over the past 20 years, almost all efficiency gains came from the residential and service sectors, reflecting the successful adoption of more stringent building codes and product regulations. However, renovation rates remains slow and only minor savings were gained in the transport sector.

Half of France’s renewables output still comes from hydropower plants that were built decades ago. The government is seeking to accelerate progress in solar and wind power by streamlining permits, promoting flagship initiatives, and better aligning regional and national ambitions. But these promising efforts risk being undermined without more sustained and consistent policies.

“The IEA peer review is very precious as it consists of an independent analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of our energy policy, especially in the context of the carbon neutrality by 2050 commitment,” said Minister Pompili. “This review comes in a crucial time frame, in particular to anticipate the French multi-annual Plan review preparation and the energy and climate programming act discussion in 2023. The IEA review confirms the orientations France has adopted, based on three pillars: strengthening energy efficiency, developing renewable energies and maintaining a nuclear electricity base.”

To maintain its low-carbon power sector, France needs to expand renewable energy and decide on the future of its ageing nuclear fleet, which in 2019 accounted for 71% of electricity production. Important work is underway. Power system operator RTE has tested several decarbonisation scenarios, supported by a dedicated study from the IEA on the technical challenges of integrating high shares of renewables, which can help inform the critical decisions on France electricity and energy future.

The IEA report calls on the government to take a timely decision on a vision for France’s post-2030 electricity mix and on the related financing mechanisms in order to send clear signals to investors, especially on nuclear energy. The government should also upgrade its capacity market to ensure sufficient electricity supply during the clean energy transition.

Energy security will be fundamentally important during the clean energy transition. France still relies on oil and gas for two-thirds of its energy consumption. The government should foster the shift to low-carbon fuels and support the adaptation of France’s oil and gas infrastructure, including by engaging in international and European cooperation on fuels such as hydrogen.

“In addition to a continued strong focus on policies that support a climate- and people-centred energy transition, the government also needs ongoing action to safeguard energy security as the nature of the risks evolve,” Dr Birol said. “This involves stepping up support for research and development to drive innovation in emerging clean energy technologies so they’re ready for market in time. It also means developing measures to ensure the availability of critical minerals that are needed for key technologies like EV batteries and wind turbines. And it includes investing in energy infrastructure to make it resilient to more extreme weather and cyber threats – and compatible with new low-carbon energy sources.”

For the French government to pursue its energy and climate goals successfully, the IEA recommends the use of regular progress reviews and the strengthening of implementation capacity across the government.




We note the announcement by the US government of its release of additional oil into the market in parallel with other countries, including China, India, Japan, Korea and the United Kingdom. We recognise that the rise in oil prices is placing a burden on consumers and has added to inflationary pressures during a period when the economic recovery remains uneven and faces a range of risks. In this context, we respect the assessments and decisions made by individual IEA member and partner countries on how best to respond to the specific challenges and circumstances they each face.
A rapid expansion of technologies and solutions that drive more efficient use of energy across the economy is necessary to keep global climate pledges within reach, according to a new IEA report, which urges governments to take the lead in mobilising the required increase in investment.

Global progress on energy efficiency has recovered this year to its pre-pandemic pace, but that was already well short of what would be needed to help put the world on track to reach net zero emissions by mid-century, according to Energy Efficiency 2021, the IEA’s annual market report on the topic. Total annual investment in energy efficiency worldwide needs to triple by 2030 to be consistent with a path towards reaching net zero emissions by 2050, as set out in the IEA’s Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050.



The IEA’s latest global assessment of market and policy trends in energy efficiency highlights the urgent need for stronger implementation of clean energy policies – with energy efficiency at their core – in order to reach international climate goals. This is the first update of the IEA’s energy efficiency market report since a raft of new spending commitments aimed at supporting the economic recovery were announced by governments over the course of 2021.



The report comes shortly after the end of the COP26 Climate Change Conference in Glasgow, whose final statement specifically called for the rapid scaling up of energy efficiency measures, recognising their key role in decarbonising energy systems.

“We consider energy efficiency to be the ‘first fuel’ as it still represents the cleanest and, in most cases, the cheapest way to meet our energy needs. There is no plausible pathway to net zero emissions without using our energy resources much more efficiently,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “A step change in energy efficiency will give us a fighting chance of staving off the worst effects of climate change while creating millions of decent jobs and driving down energy bills.”

The report notes that governments have scaled up existing, employment-intensive efficiency programmes, but it also highlights that substantial potential for job creation remains untapped. For example, investments in the energy efficiency of buildings – a well-established driver of construction jobs – are expected to rise by 20% in 2021 compared with pre-pandemic levels. Even with this record level of spending, the report details how 4 million more jobs could be added by 2030 by further increasing spending on efficient buildings, appliances and other measures in line with the IEA’s Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario.

After its worst year in a decade in 2020, when the Covid-19 pandemic shifted the centre of economic activity away from services and towards industry, the rate of improvement in global energy intensity – a key indicator of how efficiently the world’s economic activity uses energy – is expected to recover in 2021 to 1.9%. This is line with the average annual rate of improvement over the past 10 years but well below the 4% needed between 2020 and 2030 in the IEA’s pathway to net zero emissions by 2050.

As energy efficiency offers some of the fastest and most cost-effective actions to reduce CO2 emissions, front-loading efficiency measures into net zero strategies will be crucial for closing the gap between climate ambitions and current trends. This year’s report examines over 40 energy efficiency milestones mapped out in the IEA Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050 that can enhance efficiency and help get emission reductions on track.

In addition to well-developed energy efficiency policies such as appliance standards – which in some countries have avoided electricity usage equivalent to their total wind and solar power generation – the report also underlines the increasingly important role for digital technologies in energy efficiency’s future. Rapid uptake of digitally connected devices is helping to expand the scale and scope of benefits from energy efficiency, and can deliver a cheaper, easier and more cost effective clean energy transition.
By further developing their regional electricity grid, Tajikistan and its neighbours can make full use of their infrastructure and resources, thereby maximising the potential value of Tajikistan’s surplus hydropower and helping advance renewable energy throughout the region, according to the International Energy Agency.



Tajikistan’s National Development Strategy has set out a goal to more than triple its electricity exports to at least 10 terawatt-hours annually by 2030 – equivalent to about half the amount of electricity it generates overall today – which would bring much needed revenue to the country’s state-owned utility.

The IEA developed its energy policy Roadmap on Cross-Border Electricity Trading for Tajikistan as part of its work through the EU4Energy Programme. The Roadmap is being launched today as part of a Cross-Border Electricity Trading Workshop, featuring input from the Tajik Ministry of Water and Energy Resources, as well as the Asian Development Bank and United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific.

The Roadmap examines tangible steps Tajik policy makers can take to facilitate effective cross-border integration of electricity markets, benefiting not only Tajikistan, but also the surrounding region.

With existing and planned infrastructure, Tajikistan could unlock several cross-border electricity trading opportunities within the next decade by investing in developing its regulatory and market institutions and encouraging neighbouring countries to do the same.

To take advantage of its unique hydropower advantages, Tajikistan could refurbish and upgrade its facilities to improve technical flexibility, which would increase its ability to provide additional ancillary services to its neighbours in the regional market as they ramp up the share of variable renewables in their power generation mix.

By developing a modern power sector, Tajikistan could deliver financial benefits to its citizens and environmental benefits to the wider region through the expanded use of its hydropower resources.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol today received a lifetime achievement award at the major international energy industry conference ADIPEC, which is hosted by the United Arab Emirates. The award was presented by Sultan Ahmed Al Jaber, the UAE Special Envoy for Climate Change, in recognition of Dr Birol’s long-standing work assessing the global energy sector and providing clarity on how it can adapt to the clean energy transition.

The acknowledgement of Dr Birol’s efforts to advance the clean energy transition comes at a time when the IEA is multiplying its efforts to build a broad coalition to accelerate global climate action that includes the oil and gas exporting countries in the Middle East and North Africa. It also comes after the recent announcement that the United Arab Emirates will host the COP28 Climate Change Conference in 2023, after Egypt hosts COP27 next year.

“I would like to congratulate Fatih Birol on a truly well-deserved recognition of his lifetime’s commitment across the energy landscape. His understanding of how the whole energy system fits together is unparalleled. Moreover, his practical approach to ensuring sustainable development is having – and will continue to have – a positive, powerful impact on how the world makes an equitable and orderly transition to the energy system of the future,” said Sultan Al Jaber in presenting the award to Dr Birol in Abu Dhabi.

“The global warming that is already affecting us all worldwide is especially treacherous for Middle Eastern and North African countries – some are experiencing warming at a far higher rate than the global average. The region is today going through its worst drought in over 900 years,” Dr Birol said in his acceptance speech during the awards ceremony in Abu Dhabi. He underscored the need for oil and gas producing economies to reduce their reliance on fossil fuels and rapidly shift towards cleaner alternatives.

“More than at any other point in recent history, fundamental changes to the economic model of resource-rich countries look unavoidable. The future will look very different from the past,” he told the audience. “That is why it is so important that we work together. We need to deploy traditional strengths in support of economic diversification and low-carbon transformation. First movers – countries that take a proactive approach to this – could do especially well.”

In his remarks, Dr Birol highlighted that the IEA’s work with multiple countries across the region centres on supporting efforts to decarbonise energy systems while also securing the economic benefits that the clean energy transition can bring.
Achieving international climate goals such as net zero by 2050 hinges on dramatically scaling up clean energy technologies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. And having those technologies ready in time hinges on rapid accelerations in innovation. Recent years have seen tremendous progress in technologies such as solar photovoltaics, wind turbines and lithium-ion batteries, but the technological advances that are needed to achieve net zero demand a further step change in both the speed at which innovation occurs and the scale at which the resulting technologies are deployed.

Science, technology and innovation (STI) policies therefore are of pivotal importance in reaching net zero. Besides funding research and development (R&D) efforts in universities, public labs, and business firms, governments play a particularly central and wide-ranging role in setting overall national STI objectives and priorities for net zero, ensuring the flow of knowledge between different parts of the innovation system, investing in enabling infrastructure, and facilitating major demonstration projects.
The UK government and the International Energy Agency announced today that four major economies – Australia, Indonesia, Japan and Nigeria – have signed onto their action plan for rapidly improving the energy efficiency of products sold around the world, bringing the total to 14 and making it the largest ever global initiative of its kind.

Jointly led by the UK government and the IEA, the COP26 Product Efficiency Call to Action is an ambitious initiative to double the efficiency of key internationally traded products by 2030 in order to help drive reductions in global greenhouse gas emissions and consumers’ energy bills. The Call to Action encourages governments to deploy a range of policies such as product standards, labels and incentives to raise the efficiency of high-energy consuming products.

It focuses in particular on four key products – lighting, refrigerators, air conditioners and industrial motor systems – which together account for over 40% of global electricity demand and over 5 billion tonnes of global CO2 emissions per year. Fulfilling the commitments across all signatories would bring substantial energy demand savings, avoid greenhouse gas emissions, promote business innovation and ensure consumer access to affordable and high-performing technologies.

Over the past week, the governments of Australia, Indonesia, Japan and Nigeria endorsed the Joint Statement for Action on Product Efficiency, bringing the total number of government signatories to 14. Their addition makes the total energy savings achievable under the initiative greater than the previous largest initiative on product efficiency, the Global Lighting Challenge.

“IEA analysis clearly shows the importance of energy efficiency for reaching net zero emissions globally,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “Policies to improve the efficiency of products have already helped halve the energy consumption of major appliances in many markets, allowing consumers to benefit from significant savings while also lowering greenhouse gas emissions. I welcome the commitments of the governments that have endorsed our Call to Action. We hope to see more countries joining soon and look forward to working with them all to deliver the significant economic, social and environmental benefits of energy efficiency.”

The Call to Action is part of the Super-efficient Appliances and Equipment Deployment (SEAD) Initiative, which will be instrumental for efforts in the coming years to move the world onto a path towards net zero emissions.

Policies to improve the efficiency of products like appliances and equipment have been proven to be effective in delivering energy and emissions savings, and can make the rest of the clean energy transition cheaper, easier and faster. The next generation of internet-connected appliances and digital technologies are opening a new frontier for product efficiency policy, redefining the scale and scope of what is achievable.

Dr Birol discussed the importance of energy efficient products at an event at COP26 in Glasgow today with UK Business, Energy and Clean Growth Minister Greg Hands, Nigerian Environment Minister Sharon Ikeazor, Director General Abhay Bakre of the Indian Bureau of Energy Efficiency and other leading figures. Following the conclusion of COP26, the IEA and SEAD will support signatories’ efforts to achieve the aims of the Call to Action by providing knowledge, skills and access to networks.

To find out more about the COP26 Product Efficiency Call to Action, read this recent IEA article and visit https://superefficient.org/cop26-call-to-action.
The fuel economy of the world’s cars and vans needs to improve massively in the coming years for the automotive industry to do its part to support global efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, according to a new report by the International Energy Agency and key partners.

According to the latest edition of the Global Fuel Economy Initiative’s (GFEI) report on light-duty vehicle sales, global average fuel consumption has improved very slowly or even increased over the last few years in some major car markets such as the European Union and the United States. Globally, average fuel consumption declined just 0.9% over the past two years, helped by China where it fell on the back of stricter standards.

Given this slow overall global progress, achieving the GFEI’s target of halving fuel consumption of new cars and vans by 2030 relative to 2005 will require a near tripling of the average annual pace of improvement seen over the past 15 years. Fuel economy measures the distance a vehicle can travel per unit of a particular fuel, such as kilometres per litre, and is a key indicator of the greenhouse gas and pollutant emissions from the use of cars.

The GFEI report on light-duty vehicle sales is published by the IEA and its partners every two years. This year’s edition extends the scope to include for the first time a “well to wheel” analysis, which looks at emissions produced from the extraction, refining and processing of a fuel up to the point when it is consumed in a vehicle engine. For internal combustion engine cars, most emissions occur at their tailpipe (“tank to wheel”), while less than 20% of overall emissions are related to the production of their fuels (“well to tank”). By contrast, for battery electric and fuel cell electric vehicles, almost all the emissions are incurred in producing and delivering the electricity or hydrogen on which they run.

Countries around the world have historically set fuel economy standards with the aim of reducing the fuel consumption of vehicles over time. The slowing pace of improvement between 2017 and 2019 results from a number of factors. These include stagnating fuel economy standards in the US and the EU up to 2019; the rising market share of SUVs, which can use almost one-third more fuel than a medium-sized car; the rising cost of squeezing out further efficiency gains from mature technologies; and the slow adoption of more efficient alternative powertrains such as electric cars to compensate for larger vehicles.

The analysis in the new report shows that in practically all countries in 2019, battery electric vehicles had the lowest emissions, followed by plug-in hybrids and hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles. Hybrid vehicles have the lowest well-to-wheel emissions among vehicles with internal combustion engines using gasoline, diesel or compressed natural gas. By 2030, the difference is set to be even starker because the production of electricity and hydrogen becomes less emissions-intensive as low-carbon sources increasingly displace fossil fuels.

The new report includes several recommendations to improve fuel consumption trends, such as stronger policies to increase the market share of efficient zero emissions cars, to foster technological advances in vehicles using mainly gasoline or diesel, and to discourage the trend of ever-increasing vehicle size and power.



GFEI is a partnership between the IEA, the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) the International Transport Forum of the OECD (ITF), the International Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT), the University of California-Davis and the FIA Foundation. It runs projects and produces research to support government policies aimed at cleaner and more efficient vehicles.

For further information and interview requests, please contact IEApressoffice@iea.org or Kate Turner, Media Manager of the FIA Foundation, on k.turner@fiafoundation.org.
The International Energy Agency’s latest and most comprehensive assessment of clean energy technology progress worldwide shows that a step change in action and ambition is needed across all energy technologies and sectors to keep the goal of net zero emissions by 2050 within reach.

Of the 46 energy technologies and sectors assessed in the IEA’s latest edition of Tracking Clean Energy Progress (TCEP), only two are on track with the IEA’s Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario. These latest findings follow IEA analysis showing that global energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions are set for their second largest increase in history in 2021, while clean energy accounts for just 3% of global economic recovery spending to date.

For the first time, this year’s TCEP tracks progress against the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario, which was set out in the IEA’s landmark Global Roadmap. The scenario represents a narrow but feasible pathway for the global energy sector to achieve net zero CO2 emissions by 2050, universal energy access by 2030 and major improvements in air quality, while also ensuring stable and affordable energy supplies and enabling robust economic growth. Previous iterations of TCEP assessed progress against the Sustainable Development Scenario.

Despite the higher ambitions of the new benchmark and disruptions from the Covid-19 crisis, some clean energy technologies continued to show progress and remain “on track” with net zero ambitions. Electric car sales rose by 40% in 2020 to reach a record 3 million, despite overall car sales falling by 16% due to the effects of the pandemic. Initial data for 2021 suggests further growth. Lighting technologies continued to show healthy momentum, with LEDs reaching over 50% of the global lighting market.

Several emerging technologies saw encouraging progress, but these positive trends need to accelerate rapidly over the current decade to achieve deployment levels in line with a net zero by 2050 trajectory. Additions of battery storage capacity jumped by 50% last year to their highest ever level, while hydrogen saw a record year for policy action and low-carbon production. Momentum behind carbon capture, utilisation and storage has increased in recent years, but its deployment remains far below the level required in a pathway to net zero by mid-century.

In total, 18 technology areas need further improvements, while 26 are “not on track” with the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario.

One of the most significant sectors that isn’t on track is power generation, whose emissions fell by 3% in 2020 due to pandemic-induced lockdowns and a record share of renewables, but are set to rebound in 2021, driven by increased electricity demand and coal-fired generation. The rapid decarbonisation of the power system is critical for the success of the clean energy transition, since power generation accounts for 40% of energy-related CO2 emissions and electricity is increasingly being used to meet energy demand in key sectors of the economy.

All three energy end-use sectors – industry, buildings and transport – are not on track. In industry, much stronger progress is needed on material and energy efficiency, the uptake of renewable fuels, and development and deployment of low-carbon processes. To align with the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario, all new buildings need to be zero-carbon-ready as soon as 2030 along with one-fifth of existing buildings through retrofits. Less than 1% of existing buildings today are zero-carbon ready. In transport, stronger policies are needed to encourage shifts to using low-carbon modes of transport, greater energy efficiency measures, and the building out of infrastructure to support zero emission vehicles, as well as the development and uptake of those vehicle in long-distance transport.

Progress on clean energy innovation will be crucial to help develop and deploy the full range of clean energy technologies needed to decarbonise the sectors, in particular those where emissions are the most challenging to reduce, such as aviation, shipping and heavy industry.

Flaring and methane emissions from oil and gas operations – responsible for around 7% of global energy sector GHG emissions – are set to rebound in 2021 along with increased oil and gas production. In the NZE, methane emissions from fossil fuel operations fall by 75% and all non-emergency flaring is eliminated by 2030.

The analysis in TCEP draws on the IEA’s unique understanding of energy markets, modelling, technologies and statistics to track and assess progress on technology deployment, performance, investment, policy and innovation. It also benefits from the IEA’s extensive global technology network, which involves over 6,000 experts in the Technology Collaboration Programme.

Given the urgency and scale of action needed for clean energy transitions around the world, TCEP features a comprehensive list of recommended actions for governments, industry and other key actors in the global energy system.

TCEP is part of the IEA’s broader efforts on tracking energy transitions to help inform decision makers and the general public on where to focus innovation, investment and policy attention to achieve climate and sustainable development goals.
The International Energy Agency, along with the UK government and other international organisations, is launching an initiative to accelerate and improve the regulatory capacity necessary to decarbonise energy systems and help keep the world on track for a 1.5 C degree pathway.

The Regulatory Energy Transition Accelerator (RETA) is a global initiative bringing together energy regulators to discuss the challenges they face and to share best practices. In addition to the IEA, it includes the UK’s Office of Gas and Electricity Markets (Ofgem), the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), and the World Bank. The IEA will be invited to provide the coordinating functions of the Accelerator.

The initiative has received broad support from regulators around the world, and a Joint Statement endorsed by several regulators will soon be available.

Regulators have an important role to play in clean energy transitions, both to encourage investment and to manage energy systems that increasingly rely on electricity from renewable sources. Other topics for the RETA also include renewables integration, tariff structures, electrification of transport and other sectors, and the role of low carbon fuels such as hydrogen.

The IEA’s World Energy Outlook 2021 shows that controlling global temperature increase within 1.5 °C requires investment in clean energy projects and infrastructure to surge to nearly USD 4 trillion a year by 2030. However, capital for such investments can cost up to seven times more in emerging economies than advanced economies, often because of concerns about local regulations. A stable and transparent regulatory environment can help reduce the cost of capital and increase the affordability of the clean energy transitions.

With the power sector shifting from relying on centralised fossil fuel power plants to large amounts of diffused resources, which is not available on demand, regulation is essential to ensure flexibility and capacity adequacy. Regulators also need to consider new types of energy security issues such as resilience to extreme climate events and cyberattacks.

The initiative is part of the Green Grids Initiative, or One Sun One World One Grid (GGI-OSOWOG). A launch event will be hosted by Ofgem at COP26 on 3 November at 1:30PM CET, with IEA Deputy Executive Director Mary Burce Warlick, underlining the IEA’s readiness to support the initiative.

If you’d like to listen to the RETA launch, please register here.
Leaders of the G20 group of major economies recognised the International Energy Agency’s work to track the sustainability of economic recovery plans worldwide, as G20 countries pledged to deliver more funding to boost clean energy and tackle climate change.

Meeting in Rome over the weekend, leaders of the world’s largest economies highlighted their commitment to boosting investment in clean energy technologies. In the G20 Rome Leaders’ Declaration, they encouraged the continued updating of the IEA’s Sustainable Recovery Tracker, which measures how much of the spending mobilised by governments in response to the Covid-19 crisis is going towards clean energy. The Sustainable Recovery Tracker was launched in July as a key IEA contribution to Italy’s Presidency of the G20 this year.

“I welcome the G20’s focus on accelerating the deployment of clean energy and their acknowledgement of the IEA’s Sustainable Recovery Tracker as a key tool to monitor where spending is being directed compared with what is needed to meet international climate and sustainable development goals,” said IEA Executive Director Dr. Fatih Birol.

The Sustainable Recovery Tracker assesses how current spending packages measure up against the IEA’s Sustainable Recovery Plan, which was published in June 2020 and sets out a path to accelerate the transition to net zero emissions while supporting economic growth, job creation and energy access.

The latest update of the Tracker last week shows that spending on clean energy amounts to just 3% of the USD 16.9 trillion that governments have so far mobilised to cushion their economies from the effects of the pandemic, up from about 2% in July. The current level of recovery spending going towards clean energy is only 40% of the recommended levels in the Sustainable Recovery Plan. This comes at a time when global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions have resumed an upward trajectory, and are on track to register the second largest annual increase in history.

The IEA analysis also highlights that clean energy spending is highly unbalanced, with most of it taking place in advanced economies and much less in developing and emerging economies, where it is urgently needed given the more rapid pace of their energy demand growth.

“There remains an alarming gap between the climate pledges that governments are making and the money they are actually putting on the table,” Dr Birol said. “Governments have an enormous responsibility to boost investment in clean energy, which creates well-paid jobs and enhances economic efficiency, while protecting the planet from the worst effects of climate change.”

Dr. Birol has been discussing the Tracker’s latest findings in his meetings with world leaders at COP26 in Glasgow, including at an event with French Minister Barbara Pompili today.

The IEA will provide more insights on the state of the clean energy transition on 4 November when it releases the latest update of its Tracking Clean Energy Progress, which assesses the current state of play across dozens of key energy technologies and provides recommendations on what is needed in the technology space to meet long-term climate and energy goals. All of the IEA’s tracking resources are freely available on a new Clean Energy Transitions Indicators page.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol today welcomed the commitment by more than 100 countries worldwide to cut global methane emissions from human activity by 30% by 2030 and highlighted the IEA’s longstanding efforts to push for an end to methane leaks from fossil fuel operations.

Dr Birol joined dozens of world leaders – led by US President Joe Biden and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen – at the launch today of the Global Methane Pledge at the COP26 Climate Change Conference in Glasgow, underscoring that reducing methane emissions is the most impactful way to limit near-term climate change.

“I commend President Biden and President von der Leyen for their leadership on this critical issue and for bringing together over 100 countries to pursue rapid cuts in methane emissions,” said Dr Birol. “The impact of the Global Methane Pledge is potentially huge. We estimate that if the world achieves a 30% cut in methane emissions from human activity by 2030, it would have a similar impact on global warming as switching all the world’s cars, trucks, ships and planes – the entire global transport sector – over to net zero emissions technologies.”

The energy sector is one of the largest sources of methane emissions, and an IEA report released last month showed that rapid steps to tackle methane emissions from oil, gas and coal operations would have immediate impacts because of the potent effect of methane on global warming and the large scope for cost-effective actions. The report set out practical measures that could achieve a 75% cut in methane emissions from global fossil fuel operations by 2030.

Multiple leaders at the Global Methane Pledge launch, including Colombian President Iván Duque, noted the IEA’s important role in advocating measures to clamp down on methane emissions. Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau announced that his country was the first to commit to meeting the IEA goal of a 75% reduction in energy-related methane emissions by 2030. US Special Presidential Climate Envoy John Kerry, who moderated the event, said the IEA has “played a tremendous role for all of us” and expressed appreciation to Dr Birol for his leadership.

The IEA has been analysing the issue of methane emissions from the energy sector and proposing solutions to address them for around a decade. In 2012, for example, it published recommendations on the importance of methane abatement in the context of the responsible development of shale oil and gas resources. This was followed by additional analysis in key reports published in 2013 and 2015.

Methane abatement has been a recurring theme in the IEA’s flagship World Energy Outlook (WEO) series. The 2017 edition provided in-depth analysis of methane emissions from oil and gas, spurring the creation of the Methane Guiding Principles initiative. In 2019, the WEO discussed methane emissions from the coal sector and abatement measures. And WEO-2021 included methane as one of the key near-term priority areas that can close the gap in global emissions reductions to help move the world towards a pathway consistent with limiting global warming to 1.5 °C.

In mid-2019, the IEA launched the first version of the Methane Tracker, an interactive tool that provides country-by-country estimates of oil and gas methane emissions and abatement potentials. Since then, the Tracker has been updated annually, with the most recent update incorporating satellite data and allowing comparison between IEA’s estimates and those from other institutions or research projects.

In 2020, the IEA began a parallel work stream on policy and regulation for controlling methane emissions, with entries from more than 50 jurisdictions now included in the IEA’s global Policies Database. In January 2021, the IEA released the Regulatory Roadmap and Toolkit, a detailed “how to” guide for policy makers and regulators seeking to cut methane emissions.

Methane abatement is fully integrated into the IEA’s Net Zero by 2050 Roadmap, which was published in May and in which methane emissions from fossil fuel operations fall by 75% to 2030.
On 26-28 October 2021, the IEA Technology Collaboration Programme (TCP) held its fourth biannual Universal Meeting in which about 130 representatives from over 40 international collaborative initiatives held in-depth discussions on the role multilateral platforms for energy innovation can play in advancing governments’ net zero emissions plans after COP26. The online meeting immediately followed a session of the IEA’s Committee on Energy Research and Technology (CERT).

Reaching net zero by 2050 requires international cooperation between governments, businesses, investors and citizens. According to IEA analysis, countries need to speed up the rollout of available clean and efficient technologies immediately while preparing for the widespread adoption of technologies that may not be ready for market before 2030. The latter will only materialise on time if there are major innovation efforts this decade.

At this week’s meeting, the IEA, the Clean Energy Ministerial (CEM) and Mission Innovation (MI) encouraged governments to take greater advantage of existing multilateral initiatives to transform their climate ambitions into action. For over 40 years, the TCP network has contributed to advancing clean energy technologies worldwide, and together, the three platforms host over 70 multilateral initiatives covering all technologies and fuels, from research and development to setting policy frameworks for faster market uptake.

“Without effective international collaboration, reaching climate targets will take much more time and be more costly,’’ IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol said at the start of the TCP meeting. “TCPs and other multilateral initiatives are of crucial importance.”

Dr Birol called on world leaders meeting at the COP26 Climate Change Conference next week in Glasgow to “push the innovation button,” adding that “international collaboration and innovation will be at the heart of discussions.”

Amanda Wilson, Chair of the CERT, moderated an opening panel with the IEA, CEM and MI. She noted that multilateral initiatives "provide foundational knowledge for governments around the world" to inform policy making. Citing the importance of communication channels, she called on participants to build on the "various levers and audiences that each international initiative has access to – whether policy, regulatory or technical expertise, or access to Ministers, scientists, or diplomats."

Timur Gül, Head of the IEA Energy Technology Policy Division and Secretary to the IEA CERT, emphasised the critical role collaborative platforms play in “sharing knowledge and reducing transaction costs for national organisations to find partners to learn from and work with”. He called for enhanced cooperation across platforms and strong mandates from governments to ensure collaborative efforts, avoid duplication and ensure that initiatives are geared towards net zero emissions goals. “To reach net zero by 2050, multilateral initiatives will need to work together effectively and closely to advance technology innovation, and governments will need to ensure these initiatives can help deliver on their net zero ambitions,” Dr Gül said.

Dan Dorner, Head of the CEM Secretariat, noted that “the world is changing quickly and we need to adapt accordingly. When there is a proliferation of new initiatives, additions can be beneficial if they continuously add value, but not if they dilute the impact of existing efforts”. Calling for a “cross-pollination of our initiatives and knowledge” to strengthen cooperation, he added that “CEM, TCPs and MI are a set of collaborative platforms that are already closely aligned and can benefit from working together even more closely”. He said he wanted multilateral initiatives to become more flexible, nimble and ambitious to better help governments “turn words into action”.

Similarly, Jennie Dodson, Head of the MI Secretariat, said multilateral initiatives help “groups of countries come together around common themes of interest and can push the frontier of clean technologies, helping to drive ambition in other diplomatic forums” – such as at COP26, where new MI Missions will be launched. She called for all collaborative platforms to “identify clear goals and targets, track progress and be action focused” to support government efforts towards net zero. “No single initiative will have all the necessary knowledge, relationships and levers to drive change at the pace and scale needed. If initiatives can align towards the same goals and outcomes, each with a clear specific purpose, we can create a vast network of action that can build momentum greater than each initiative alone.”

Ms Wilson, the Chair, concluded the session by noting a “clear call for action” ahead of COP26.

The Universal Meeting also included three thematic sessions, based on priority areas of work identified by CERT and TCPs. The first session focused on how multilateral initiatives can work more closely together. The second looked at increasing the global reach of the TCPs and attracting new members, building on two recent IEA handbooks for TCPs and other clean energy initiatives specifically addressing these themes. The third session examined how TCPs can further enhance the communication strategy of their programmes to increase their reach and impact.

The organisation of the TCP universal meeting benefited from contributions from the Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging Economies programme, which received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 952363.
The International Energy Agency today launched a new online resource bringing together key energy and emissions indicators to provide an overview of progress towards net zero emissions globally and for individual countries as leaders from around the world prepare to gather at the COP26 Climate Change Conference in Glasgow.

The IEA’s Energy Transitions hub includes a range of crucial metrics on emissions and clean energy from the comprehensive array of global energy data the Agency collects, processes and publishes. The new hub, whose indicators will update regularly, is designed to help governments, companies, investors and citizens keep track of international efforts to move towards a low-carbon energy future.

As the global authority on energy, the IEA is committed to making as much of its data and analysis as possible available for free to help inform public debates and policy making worldwide on energy and climate. The data from the Clean Energy Transitions Indicators will be freely available to everyone.

The hub will combine the IEA’s wide range of tracking resources, which assess the state of play of dozens of key energy technologies, sectors, investments and government policies, as well as energy supply and demand trends and their impacts on carbon emissions and energy sector employment.

“Governments have set out ambitious goals but we aren’t seeing anywhere near enough policy action and actual investment to rapidly roll out the technologies we need to get the planet on track to achieve net zero emissions,’’ said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “The IEA’s new Clean Energy Transitions Indicators hub will provide an invaluable tool for anyone who wants to cut through the rhetoric and see what the data tell us about where things stand with global efforts to move towards a clean energy future.”

As well as a suite of key energy and emissions indicators, the new hub will offer users a gateway to the IEA’s major energy transition tracking resources that combine data and analysis to provide insights into key global trends. This includes the Sustainable Recovery Tracker, which assesses the amount of recovery spending going towards clean energy investments, and the implications for energy emissions, transitions and employment. The Tracker received a significant update just yesterday ahead of the G20 Leaders’ Summit and COP26.

The new indicators hub will also encompass the IEA’s Tracking Clean Energy Progress online resource, which analyses the state of play in 46 vital energy technology areas. On 4 November, the IEA will release the 2021 update of Tracking Clean Energy Progress, benchmarking the different technology areas against the pathway set out in the Agency’s landmark Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050, which was published in May.
Spending on clean energy amounts to 3% of the USD 16.9 trillion that governments have so far mobilised to bolster their economies from the recession triggered by the Covid-19 pandemic, according to the latest update from the International Energy Agency. The share is up from around 2% in July but still leaves global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions on an upward trajectory, with this year set to be the second largest annual increase in history.

Governments have increased the amount of their economic recovery spending that is going towards clean energy investments by 20% in the past three months, new estimates from the IEA’s Sustainable Recovery Tracker show. But the spending is highly imbalanced geographically – with most of it taking place in advanced economies rather than the developing world – and still falls short of what is needed to put global CO2 emissions into sustained decline.

“We are witnessing an uneven and unsustainable recovery from last year’s economic crisis – a recovery that consists of huge growth in fossil fuel consumption while leaving behind nearly 80% of the world’s population in the shift towards a new and cleaner energy economy,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “On the eve of the G20 Leaders’ Summit and the COP26 Climate Change Conference, governments of major economies need to show they are ready to drive a massive scaling up of investments in clean energy globally and steer the world onto a safer path. Failure to put their money where their mouth is could well mean failure to keep the door open to limiting global warming to 1.5 °C.”

The IEA introduced the Sustainable Recovery Tracker in July to assess how government recovery measures to date compare with the Sustainable Recovery Plan, which the Agency published last year. The IEA Plan recommended USD 1 trillion of annual spending on clean energy measures worldwide over a three-year period that could put the world on track with international climate goals while boosting global economic growth and employment. The Sustainable Recovery Tracker, which was launched as a contribution to Italy’s Presidency of the G20, will continue to be updated regularly, as requested by G20 members.

In the past three months, 40 new funding announcements have been made, and 140 previously announced spending programmes have added new details or spending. These expand on the 800 spending policies previously covered in our Tracker. In total, governments have now earmarked an estimated USD 470 billion for clean energy investment between now and 2030 – an increase of USD 90 billion, or 20%, from the level seen in July.

Analysis of these policies show that advanced economies are moving strongly towards sustainable recoveries, but the global total amounts to only around 40% of the level called for under the IEA Sustainable Recovery Plan. This is nonetheless an increase from where things stood in July, when the share was estimated at 35%.

Some advanced economies – including France, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States – are in the process of crafting and approving new investment programmes. This could put advanced economies within reach of their share of the Sustainable Recovery Plan, assuming government support quickly reaches viable projects amid supply chain disruptions and market turbulence.

However, emerging and developing economies – where the majority of clean energy investments need to occur in the next decade – are being left behind. Across emerging and developing economies as a whole, spending on clean energy measures is projected to be only around 20% of the level recommended in the Sustainable Recovery Plan, with little new spending in the pipeline due to tightening fiscal constraints as a result of the pandemic. India stands out as an exception with its announcement of potentially substantial new spending through the Gati Shakti infrastructure plan, which could include new provisions for clean energy investments.

“The shortfall in sustainable recovery spending in emerging and developing economies is a global problem that requires a global solution,” said Dr Birol. “These countries don’t have the luxury of cheap financing that many advanced economies enjoy. The world urgently needs to come up with bold measures to mobilise and channel clean energy investment to emerging and developing economies on a major scale. This is where it is needed most and has the biggest bang for its buck in tackling emissions.”

For the first time, the IEA Tracker also assessed the employment impacts associated with sustainable recovery spending. It estimates current government spending plans are set to create demand for an additional 5 million jobs in clean energy globally by 2023, most of them in the buildings sector, as well as in electricity infrastructure, renewables and electric vehicles. A lack of skilled workers to fill these positions could be a major bottleneck, underscoring the central role of training, particularly developing new skills for workers moving to different industries, in ensuring a successful sustainable recovery.

The IEA will provide more insights on the state of the clean energy transition on 4 November when it releases the latest update of its Tracking Clean Energy Progress online resource, which assesses the current state of play across dozens of key energy technologies and provides recommendations on how to align them with long-term climate and energy goals.

All of the IEA’s tracking indicators will be brought together on a new Clean Energy Transitions Indicators page that will be launched on Friday 29 October and freely available to everyone. These indicators will be updated regularly and help governments, companies and other global actors track how the world is progressing on advancing clean energy transitions.


A global group of heads of government, ministers and thought leaders today unveiled 12 key recommendations aimed at enabling citizens to benefit from the opportunities and navigate the disruptions created by clean energy transitions – a fundamental prerequisite for progress towards a low-carbon future.

The recommendations of the Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions will be presented today at its third meeting, which will be open to the public to watch online starting at 16:30 CET.

The recommendations come at a critical moment just before the COP26 Climate Change Conference in Glasgow where countries have a major opportunity to raise their ambitions for transitioning to clean energy and cutting greenhouse gas emissions.

Convened by the International Energy Agency’s Executive Director Fatih Birol in January 2021, the Commission is headed by Danish Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen and chaired by Dan Jørgensen, Denmark’s Minister of Climate, Energy and Utilities. Sophie Gladima, Senegal’s Minister of Energy and Petroleum, serves as co-chair. The Commission’s work is driven by the belief that successful energy transitions must enjoy public support and provide clear public benefits.

The 12 recommendations aim to turn high-level principles into concrete action. Among the key points are a focus on ensuring policies create good quality, well-paid jobs, and bring widespread benefits to people in a fair and equitable way. They also emphasise the vital importance of protecting workers and communities that might be negatively affected by clean energy transitions. The recommendations also include advice on how to ensure all policies have equity and social inclusion at the heart of their design, and how to engage all citizens as active participants in transitions.

“We must never forget that clean energy transitions are for and about people, so plans to advance transitions must have people-focused policies at their core,” said Dr Birol. “The Global Commission’s recommendations can empower decision makers around the world to put this into practice. I’d like to thank Prime Minister Frederiksen and Ministers Jørgensen and Gladima for their leadership – and all the Commission members for their valuable contributions. The IEA is deeply committed to ensuring that as many people and communities as possible around the world are able to benefit from clean energy transitions.”

“For the clean energy transition to succeed it has to be just – or there will be no transition. Individuals and communities that are dependent on fossil industries today must not be left behind tomorrow.” said Minister Jørgensen. “Our recommendations and the many great cases from all around the world clearly demonstrate that people-centred clean energy transition is not only possible – it is already happening. I hope this will serve as inspiration to others.”

“There cannot be a successful energy transition on a global scale without full, adequate and fair consideration of development priorities and continuous improvement in the living conditions of our populations! The sustainable development goals must be the foundation of energy transition policies around the world,” said Minister Gladima. “The work of the Global Commission should be continued and amplified to ensure such considerations are duly integrated in clean energy transitions.”

The recommendations are underpinned by 150 case studies from over 50 countries that were contributed by Commission members and are accessible on the IEA website. They highlight practical advice and best practices across four main areas: decent jobs and worker protection; social and economic development; equality, social inclusion and fairness; and people as active participants.

The Commission’s work complements recent major IEA reports on clean energy transitions such as Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector and the World Energy Outlook 2021.

More details on the Commission and its members are available on its dedicated web page.
G7 members are well placed to fully decarbonise their electricity supply by 2035, which would accelerate the technological advances and infrastructure rollouts needed to lead global energy markets towards net zero emissions by 2050, according to a new report from the International Energy Agency. The report was requested by the United Kingdom, which holds the G7 Presidency this year.



The pathway laid out in the report – Achieving Net Zero Electricity Sectors in G7 Members – underscores how the G7 can serve as first movers, jump-starting innovation and lowering the cost of technologies for other countries while maintaining electricity security and placing people at the centre of energy transitions.



The new report builds on the IEA’s landmark Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050 to identify key milestones, challenges and opportunities for G7 members. Following on from June’s G7 Summit, it is designed to inform discussions at the COP26 Climate Change Conference in Glasgow, for which the UK also holds the Presidency.



At the G7 Summit, the leaders of Canada Germany, France, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States – plus the European Union – committed to reach “an overwhelmingly decarbonised” power system in the 2030s and net zero emissions across their economies no later than 2050.



The G7 now accounts for nearly 40% of the global economy, 36% of global power generation capacity, 30% of global energy demand and 25% of global energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. Its clean energy transition is already underway, with coal making way for cleaner options. The electricity sector now accounts for one-third of the G7’s energy-related emissions, down from a peak of nearly two-fifths in 2007. In 2020, natural gas and renewables were the primary sources of electricity in the G7, each providing about 30% of the total, with nuclear power and coal close to 20% each.



Reaching net zero emissions from electricity would require completing the phase-out of unabated coal while simultaneously expanding low emissions sources of electricity, including renewables, nuclear, hydrogen and ammonia. According to the IEA’s pathway to net zero by 2050, renewables need to provide 60% of the G7’s electricity supply by 2030, whereas under current policies they are on track to reach 48%.



The G7 has an opportunity to demonstrate that electricity systems with 100% renewables during specific periods of the year and in certain locations can be secure and affordable. At the same time, increased reliance on renewables does require the G7 to lead the way in finding solutions to maintain electricity security, including seasonal storage and more flexible and robust grids.



In the IEA’s pathway to net zero by 2050, innovation delivers 30% of G7 electricity sector emissions reductions to 2050, which will require international collaboration while also creating technology leadership opportunities for G7 countries. Mature technologies like hydropower and light-water nuclear reactors contribute only about 15% of the reductions in the IEA pathway. About 55% come from deploying technologies that either still have huge scope to grow further, such as onshore wind and solar PV, or in early adoption phase, such as heat pumps and battery storage. Technologies still in development, such as floating offshore wind, carbon capture and hydrogen, would deliver another 30%.



The new report underscores that people must be placed at the centre of all clean electricity transitions. Decarbonising electricity could create as many as 2.6 million jobs in the G7 over the next decade, but as many as 300,000 jobs could be lost at fossil fuel power plants, with profound local impacts that demand strong and sustained policy attention to minimise the negative impacts on individuals and communities. Household spending on energy should decline by 2050, as rising spending on electricity is more than offset by lower expenses for coal, natural gas and oil products. Governments must foster efficiency gains and structure energy tariffs for consumers and businesses so that all households can benefit from these cost savings.



“G7 members have the financial and technological means to bring their electricity sector emissions to net zero in the 2030s, and doing so will create numerous spill-over benefits for other countries’ clean energy transitions and add momentum to global efforts to reach net zero emissions by 2050,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “G7 leadership in this crucial endeavour would demonstrate that getting to electricity sectors with net zero emissions is both doable and advantageous, and would also drive new innovations that can benefit businesses and consumers.”

“We have decided to take the path towards climate neutrality. This can only be achieved together – with joint and decisive action,” said Peter Altmaier, Germany’s Federal Minister for Economic Affairs and Energy. “Our way towards climate neutrality is ambitious, but necessary. We need to act together with clear, joint and decisive action. The energy sector plays clearly a key role on our way to climate neutrality. Solutions are at hand, such as the exit from coal-fired power generation in Germany and other countries. The IEA report shows how the G7 can live up to its pioneering role in this regard – a matter that will continue to be topical during the German G7 presidency in 2022.”

“In this critical year of climate action ahead of COP26, I welcome this report, which sets out a roadmap for the G7 to meet the commitment, made earlier this year, to accelerate the transition from coal to clean power,” said COP26 President-Designate Alok Sharma. “The report also highlights the huge jobs and growth opportunities that this decade could bring, from scaling-up renewables and improving energy efficiency to driving digital solutions and deploying critical technologies.”

“We welcome the IEA’s report on achieving net zero electricity sectors in the G7. These countries should provide leadership in the energy transition,” said UN High Level Climate Action Champions Gonzalo Munoz and Nigel Topping. “Decarbonising electricity is essential to keep 1.5 degrees alive, as well as to provide the power for electrification of other sectors. Key G7 milestones in the report include phase out of unabated coal and reaching 60% renewable share of electricity by 2030 and overall net zero electricity emissions by 2035. The private sector stands ready to support this effort.”

A statement by the UK G7 Presidency on the report is available here.

A statement by the the UN High Level Climate Action Champions is available here.
A new energy economy is emerging around the world as solar, wind, electric vehicles and other low-carbon technologies flourish. But as the pivotal moment of COP26 approaches, the IEA’s new World Energy Outlook makes it clear that this clean energy progress is still far too slow to put global emissions into sustained decline towards net zero, highlighting the need for an unmistakeable signal of ambition and action from governments in Glasgow.

At a time when policy makers are contending with the impacts of both climate change and volatile energy markets, the World Energy Outlook 2021 (WEO-2021) is designed as a handbook for the COP26 Climate Change Conference in Glasgow, which offers a critical opportunity to accelerate climate action and the clean energy transition. The new analysis – which the IEA is making available for free online – delivers stark warnings about the direction in which today’s policy settings are taking the world. But it also provides clear-headed analysis of how to move in a well-managed way towards a pathway that would have a good chance of limiting global warming to 1.5 °C and avoiding the worst effects of climate change.

The WEO-2021, the IEA’s annual flagship publication, shows that even as deployments of solar and wind go from strength to strength, the world’s consumption of coal is growing strongly this year, pushing carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions towards their second largest annual increase in history.

“The world’s hugely encouraging clean energy momentum is running up against the stubborn incumbency of fossil fuels in our energy systems,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “Governments need to resolve this at COP26 by giving a clear and unmistakeable signal that they are committed to rapidly scaling up the clean and resilient technologies of the future. The social and economic benefits of accelerating clean energy transitions are huge, and the costs of inaction are immense.”

The WEO-2021 spells out clearly what is at stake: what the pledges to reduce emissions made by governments so far mean for the energy sector and the climate. And it sets out what needs to be done to move beyond these announced pledges towards a trajectory that would reach net zero emissions globally by mid-century – the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario from the landmark IEA report published in May, which is consistent with limiting global warming to 1.5 °C.

As well as the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario, the WEO-2021 explores two other scenarios to gain insights into how the global energy sector may develop over the next three decades – and what the implications would be. The Stated Policies Scenario represents a path based on the energy and climate measures governments have actually put in place to date, as well as specific policy initiatives that are under development. In this scenario, almost all of the net growth in energy demand through 2050 is met by low emissions sources, but that leaves annual emissions still around today’s levels. As a result, global average temperatures are still rising when they hit 2.6 °C above pre-industrial levels in 2100.

The Announced Pledges Scenario maps out a path in which the net zero emissions pledges announced by governments so far are implemented in time and in full. In this scenario, demand for fossil fuels peaks by 2025, and global CO2 emissions fall by 40% by 2050. All sectors see a decline, with the electricity sector delivering by far the largest. The global average temperature rise in 2100 is held to around 2.1 °C.

For the first time in a WEO, oil demand goes into eventual decline in all the scenarios examined, although the timing and speed of the drop vary widely. If all today’s announced climate pledges are met, the world would still be consuming 75 million oil barrels per day by 2050 – down from around 100 million today – but that plummets to 25 million in the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario. Natural gas demand increases in all scenarios over the next five years, but there are sharp divergences after this.

After decades of growth, the prospects for coal power go downhill in the Announced Pledges Scenario – a decline that could be accelerated further by China’s recent announcement of an end to its support for building coal plants abroad. That move may result in the cancellation of planned projects that would save some 20 billion tonnes in cumulative CO2 emissions through 2050 – an amount similar to the total emissions savings from the European Union reaching net zero by 2050.

The differences between the outcomes in the Announced Pledges Scenario and the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario are stark, highlighting the need for more ambitious commitments if the world is to reach net zero by mid-century.

“Today’s climate pledges would result in only 20% of the emissions reductions by 2030 that are necessary to put the world on a path towards net zero by 2050,” Dr Birol said. “Reaching that path requires investment in clean energy projects and infrastructure to more than triple over the next decade. Some 70% of that additional spending needs to happen in emerging and developing economies, where financing is scarce and capital remains up to seven times more expensive than in advanced economies.”

Insufficient investment is contributing to uncertainty over the future. Spending on oil and natural gas has been depressed by price collapses in 2014-15 and again in 2020. As a result, it is geared towards a world of stagnant or even falling demand. At the same time, spending on clean energy transitions is far below what would be required to meet future needs in a sustainable way.

“There is a looming risk of more turbulence for global energy markets,” Dr Birol said. “We are not investing enough to meet future energy needs, and the uncertainties are setting the stage for a volatile period ahead. The way to address this mismatch is clear – a major boost in clean energy investment, across all technologies and all markets. But this needs to happen quickly.”

The report stresses that the extra investment to reach net zero by 2050 is less burdensome than it might appear. More than 40% of the required emissions reductions would come from measures that pay for themselves, such as improving efficiency, limiting gas leakage, or installing wind or solar in places where they are now the most competitive electricity generation technologies.

These investments also create huge economic opportunities. Successfully pursuing net zero would create a market for wind turbines, solar panels, lithium-ion batteries, electrolysers and fuel cells of well over USD 1 trillion a year by 2050, comparable in size to the current oil market. Even in a much more electrified energy system, major opportunities remain for fuel suppliers to produce and deliver low-carbon gases. Just in the Announced Pledges Scenario, an additional 13 million workers would be employed in clean energy and related sectors by 2030, while that number doubles in the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario.
Ammonia is the starting point for all mineral nitrogen fertilisers, forming a bridge between the nitrogen in the air and the food we eat. But the essential services ammonia provides come at a cost for the world’s climate. Ammonia production accounts for about 2% of total final energy consumption, virtually all of it from fossil fuels, resulting in a carbon dioxide (CO2) footprint equivalent to the total emissions of South Africa’s energy system.

Despite continued efficiency gains in fertiliser use, a growing and more global affluent population is expected to require greater ammonia production during a period when many governments around the world will be working on implementing commitments to bring their economies’ emissions down towards net zero.

“The world will need more ammonia but cannot afford the emissions that come with its production,’’ said Timur Gül, Head of the Energy Technology Policy Division, who designed and directed the study. “The IEA is proud to have collaborated with the International Fertilizer Association to produce our roadmap for the ammonia industry, which sits at the nexus between the world’s energy and agricultural systems.’’

The Ammonia Technology Roadmap is the latest publication in a series of IEA sectoral roadmaps dating back to 2009, with the previous instalment providing a deep dive into the challenges facing the iron and steel industry.

The latest roadmap examines three possible futures for ammonia production. The Stated Policies Scenario sees current trends continuing, with the industry making incremental improvements but falling well short of a sustainable trajectory. In the Sustainable Development Scenario, the sector adopts the technologies and policies required to put it on a pathway aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement, while the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario describes a trajectory that is compatible with reaching net zero emissions for the global energy system by 2050.

The new roadmap concludes with a chapter outlining the necessary roles and actions of the main stakeholders, establishing key milestones and decision points.
The International Energy Agency is teaming up with the Italian Ministry of Ecological Transition (IMET) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to call for pilot projects on how digitalisation can contribute to flexible and resilient energy systems.

The initiative, a follow-up to the 2019 Climate Action Summit, aims to accelerate global climate action and encourage the uptake of clean energy models. The pilot projects are intended to produce on-the-ground insights, test new approaches and disseminate findings that will feed into the IEA’s Digital Demand-Driven Electricity Networks (3DEN) Initiative. The 3DEN Initiative focuses on the policies, regulatory environment, technology and investments needed to accelerate power system modernisation as well as the effective utilisation of demand-side resources, such as electric vehicles and behind-the-meter batteries.

The open competitive call for proposals intends to support the implementation of pilot projects across the prioritised countries, namely Brazil, Colombia, India, Indonesia, Morocco, South Africa and Tunisia for a maximum of EUR 1.8 million per project (excluding co-financing). The projects are expected to develop and showcase innovative business and regulatory models for the adoption of smarter digital power infrastructures.

You can find more details and the application form here.

For more information, you can contact the UNEP focal points, Myriem Touhami and Carolina Merighi.
Climate action cannot focus only on carbon dioxide. Governments and energy companies have major opportunities to reduce methane emissions, which provides the most impactful way to limit near-term climate change, the International Energy Agency said in a new report released today.

Methane is responsible for around 30% of the global rise in temperatures to date. Rapid steps to tackle methane emissions from oil, gas and coal operations would have immediate impacts because of the potent effect of methane on global warming and the large scope for cost-effective actions, according to the report, Curtailing methane emissions from fossil fuel operations: Pathways to a 75% cut by 2030.

Fossil fuel operations globally emitted close to 120 million tonnes of methane in 2020, nearly one-third of all methane emissions from human activity. Much of these emissions are simply leakage along the production and supply chain that operators fail to capture or avert. There are cost-effective ways to limit these emissions, especially in the oil and gas sector. The IEA estimates that more than 70% of current emissions from oil and gas operations are technically feasible to prevent and around 45% could typically be avoided at no net cost because the value of the captured gas is higher than the cost of the abatement measure. This share would be much higher at the moment, given the record highs in natural gas prices.

The report provides crucial insights and guidance for governments, regulators and the energy industry in the lead-up to the COP26 Climate Change Conference and beyond. Building on the estimates of emissions and options for addressing them in the IEA Methane Tracker and Regulatory Roadmap and Toolkit, the report identifies and quantifies a range of measures, including policy and regulatory actions, voluntary industry initiatives, and improvements in emissions measurement and reporting.

“At a time when we are constantly being reminded of the damaging effects of climate change, it is inexcusable that massive amounts of methane continue to be allowed to just seep into the air from fossil fuel operations,’’ said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “These emissions are avoidable, the solutions are proven and even profitable in many cases. And the benefits in terms of avoided near-term warming are huge. I welcome the renewed impetus behind this issue with the Global Methane Pledge, announced by the European Union and the United States, and urge all countries and companies to step up their actions. ”

Quick action is needed because eventual declines in demand for fossil fuels alone will not achieve rapid enough reductions of methane emissions to forestall the worst effects of climate change. In the IEA’s Roadmap to Net Zero Emissions by 2050, methane emissions from fossil fuel operations fall by around 75% between 2020 and 2030. About one-third of this decline is a result of an overall reduction in fossil fuel consumption, but the larger share comes from measures and technologies aimed at reducing emissions in existing fields, pipelines and mines.

The new Global Methane Pledge calls for at least a 30% reduction in global methane emissions from human activity by 2030. If the world achieves the 75% cut in methane from fossil fuel operations as described in the new IEA report, this would lower total human-caused methane emissions by around 25%, and so would go a long way to achieving the aim of the Global Methane Pledge.

Multiple jurisdictions around the world have already employed well-established policy tools, including leak detection and repair requirements, technology standards and a ban on non-emergency flaring and venting. Some countries have included methane alongside other greenhouse gases in their national net zero pledges, while others have made more targeted announcements.

These governments could also leverage their buying power to incentivise other countries to step up their measures against emissions, given that more than 40% of the oil and gas produced in countries without strong methane commitments is exported for consumption in countries that do have such commitments.

Company initiatives play an important role in tackling emissions, especially when leading companies act to spread best practices across the industry. Growing transparency on the sources and magnitude of methane emissions is also set to play an important role, supported by promising developments in monitoring technologies, notably from satellites, and the establishment of a common framework for measuring and reporting emissions. To achieve rapid reductions in methane emissions, governments, companies and other stakeholders must all work to build a larger coalition of actors committed to this effort.
Governments need to move faster and more decisively on a wide range of policy measures to enable low-carbon hydrogen to fulfil its potential to help the world reach net zero emissions while supporting energy security, the International Energy Agency says in a new report released today.

Currently, global production of low-carbon hydrogen is minimal, its cost is not yet competitive, and its use in promising sectors such as industry and transport remains limited – but there are encouraging signs that it is on the cusp of significant cost declines and widespread global growth, according the IEA’s Global Hydrogen Review 2021.

When the IEA released its special report on The Future of Hydrogen for the G20 in 2019, only France, Japan and Korea had strategies for the use of hydrogen. Today, 17 governments have released hydrogen strategies, more than 20 others have publicly announced they are working to develop strategies, and numerous companies are seeking to tap into hydrogen business opportunities. Pilot projects are underway to produce steel and chemicals with low-carbon hydrogen, with other industrial uses under development. The cost of fuel cells that run on hydrogen continue to fall, and sales of fuel-cell vehicles are growing.



“It is important to support the development of low-carbon hydrogen if governments are going to meet their climate and energy ambitions,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director, who is launching the report today at the Hydrogen Energy Ministerial Meeting hosted by Japan. “We have experienced false starts before with hydrogen, so we can’t take success for granted. But this time, we are seeing exciting progress in making hydrogen cleaner, more affordable and more available for use across different sectors of the economy. Governments need to take rapid actions to lower the barriers that are holding low-carbon hydrogen back from faster growth, which will be important if the world is to have a chance of reaching net zero emissions by 2050.”

Hydrogen is light, storable and energy-dense, and its use as a fuel produces no direct emissions of pollutants or greenhouse gases. The main obstacle to the extensive use of low-carbon hydrogen is the cost of producing it. This requires either large amounts of electricity to produce it from water, or the use of carbon capture technologies if the hydrogen is produced from fossil fuels. Almost all hydrogen produced today comes from fossil fuels without carbon capture, resulting in close to 900 million tonnes of CO2 emissions, equivalent to the combined CO2 emissions of the United Kingdom and Indonesia.

Investments and focused policies are needed to close the price gap between low-carbon hydrogen and emissions-intensive hydrogen produced from fossil fuels. Depending on the prices of natural gas and renewable electricity, producing hydrogen from renewables can cost between 2 and 7 times as much as producing it from natural gas without carbon capture. But with technological advances and economies of scale, the cost of making hydrogen with solar PV electricity can become competitive with hydrogen made with natural gas, as set out in the IEA’s Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050.

Global capacity of electrolysers, which produce hydrogen from water using electricity, doubled over the last five years, with about 350 projects currently under development and another 40 projects in early stages of development. Should all these projects be realised, global hydrogen supply from electrolysers – which creates zero emissions provided the electricity used is clean – would reach 8 million tonnes by 2030. This is a huge increase from today’s level of less than 50 000 tonnes – but remains well below the 80 million tonnes required in 2030 in the IEA pathway to net zero emissions by 2050.

Practically all hydrogen use in 2020 was for refining and industrial applications. Hydrogen can be used in many more applications than those common today, the report highlights. Hydrogen has important potential uses in sectors where emissions are particularly challenging to reduce, such as chemicals, steel, long-haul trucking, shipping and aviation.

The broader issue is that policy action so far focuses on the production of low-carbon hydrogen while the necessary corresponding steps that are required to build demand in new applications is limited. Enabling greater use of hydrogen in industry and transport will require much stronger policy measures to foster the construction of the necessary storage, transmission and charging facilities.

Countries with hydrogen strategies have committed at least USD 37 billion to the development and deployment of hydrogen technologies, and the private sector has announced additional investment of USD 300 billion. But putting the hydrogen sector on path consistent with global net zero emissions by 2050 requires USD 1 200 billion of investment between now and 2030, the IEA estimates.

The Global Hydrogen Review lays out a series of recommendations for near term-action beyond just mobilising investment in research, production and infrastructure. It highlights that governments could stimulate demand and reduce price differences through carbon pricing, mandates, quotas and hydrogen requirements in public procurement. In addition, international cooperation is needed to establish standards and regulations, and to create global hydrogen markets that could spur demand in countries with limited potential to produce low-carbon hydrogen and create export opportunities for countries with large renewable energy supplies or large CO2 storage potential.
China’s remarkable economic growth over the past four decades has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty, turning the country into a leader in many industries but also the world’s largest carbon emitter, accounting for one-third of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. China provides more than half of the world’s steel and cement, but the CO2 emissions from just those two sectors in China are higher than the European Union’s total CO2 emissions.

China is aiming to reach a peak in its CO2 emissions before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060. The energy sector is the source of almost 90% of China’s greenhouse gas emissions, putting energy policies at the heart of the country’s transition to carbon neutrality. A new IEA report released today – An Energy Sector Roadmap to Carbon Neutrality in China – explores how China can reach its objectives while ensuring energy security and affordability for its citizens. It shows that the required investments are well within China’s capacities, given the size and dynamism of its economy. The report responds to the Chinese government’s invitation to the IEA to cooperate on long-term strategies.

“China is a clean energy powerhouse and has played a leading role in many of the world’s success stories to date, from solar power to electric vehicles,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “China’s efforts to achieve its ambition of carbon neutrality will result in even greater flourishing across a wider array of low-carbon technologies and a significant decline in fossil fuel use in the coming decades.”

“However, the really uplifting news is that our new Roadmap shows China has the means and capabilities to accomplish an even faster clean energy transition that would result in greater social and economic benefits for the Chinese people and also increase the world’s chances of limiting the rise in global temperatures to 1.5 °C,” Dr Birol added. “This accelerated transition would put China’s CO2 emissions into marked decline after 2025, opening up the possibility of China reaching carbon neutrality well before 2060. This would be both good for China and good for the world.”

China has made notable progress in its clean energy transition, but it still faces some significant challenges. Coal accounts for over 60% of electricity generation, and China continues to build new coal power plants domestically. At the same time, China has added more solar power capacity than any other country year after year. It is the second largest oil consumer in the world, but it also home to 70% of global manufacturing capacity for electric vehicle batteries.

At the same time, reaching China’s climate targets cannot rely solely on the rollout of renewables and electric vehicles. It will need to involve solutions to tackle emissions from its huge existing fleet of fossil fuel-based power plants, steel mills, cement kilns and other industrial facilities. If the existing emissions-intensive energy infrastructure in China continues to operate in the same way as it does today, its CO2 output between now and 2060 would amount to one-third of the global carbon budget for limiting the global temperature rise to 1.5 °C. This is aside from any new plants that may be built to meet growing demand.

The China Roadmap sets out a pathway consistent with the enhanced ambitions that China announced last year in which CO2 emissions reach a peak before 2030 and carbon neutrality is achieved before 2060. The main drivers of emissions reductions between now and 2030 in this pathway are energy efficiency improvements, expansion of renewables and a reduction in coal use. Electricity generation from renewables, mainly wind and solar PV, increases seven-fold between 2020 and 2060, accounting for almost 80% of China’s power mix by then. Industrial CO2 emissions decline by nearly 95% by 2060, with the role of emerging innovative technologies, such as hydrogen and carbon capture, growing strongly after 2030. These changes will boost China’s labour market, with more new jobs created in growing low-carbon energy technologies than are lost in declining fossil fuel industries.

The Roadmap also explores the opportunities for China to pursue – and benefit from – an even faster clean energy transition, which would result in China’s CO2 emissions declining to almost 20% below their current level by 2030. On top of the major advantages that come from reducing the impact of climate change, the social and economic benefits include greater prosperity for regions that have not yet fully benefited from China’s economic development and a bigger net gain in job creation nationwide. And investment needs are not a barrier for the faster transition, since the cumulative investments are similar to those in the slower one.

“This Roadmap shows what is possible: China has a clear pathway to build a more sustainable, secure and inclusive energy future,” Dr Birol said. “As China makes some important decisions in the coming weeks and months, the IEA is pleased to share our analysis and global expertise with Chinese policy makers so that together we can help build a brighter future. I also welcome President Xi Jinping’s announcement last week that China will stop building coal power plants overseas as a further positive step towards curbing global emissions.”
The International Energy Agency announced today that it is committing to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from its activities to net zero by 2024, aligning itself with the recommendations of its recent landmark report Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector.

“The IEA is committed to helping all countries achieve their energy and climate goals, with our Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050 providing a narrow but achievable pathway to this critical goal,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “As I have pointed out repeatedly, it’s not enough to simply talk about net zero – you have to act. That’s what we’re doing by putting in place practical measures that follow the recommendations of our Roadmap. We are determined for the IEA to reach net zero by November 2024 – the 50th anniversary of the founding of our Agency.”

Based on a detailed assessment of the greenhouse gas emissions footprint of its operations and in accordance with the highest international standards, the IEA is pursuing a concrete and practical action plan to reduce emissions quickly and as close to zero as possible. This will include all emissions from the use of IEA offices, official missions, staff members’ commutes, procurement of goods and services, waste generation, water use, and fugitive emissions from air conditioning and other areas.

Planned measures include encouraging greater use of video-conferencing to reduce travel; purchasing clean electricity for offices; and engaging with suppliers and contractors on addressing emissions from the goods and services they provide to the IEA. For any residual emissions the Agency may still have in 2024, it will purchase carbon credits with the highest level of environmental integrity.

The IEA will provide annual updates on its progress towards net zero emissions. This will include verification of the outcome in 2024 by an independent third party.
Ministers from across the Middle East and North Africa recently took part in a high-level dialogue hosted by the IEA and the Ministry of Energy and Minerals of Oman to share ideas on the roles clean energy could play in their economic future.



At the meeting on 9 September, Ministers discussed options for decarbonising local energy supply and presented their current and future plans to increase renewable electricity capacity and energy efficiency. They also outlined their work to reduce the greenhouse gas intensity of their oil and gas industries through initiatives to reduce gas flaring, mitigate methane leakage and implement carbon capture and utilisation. There was also a discussion about the potential for future low-carbon exports, including in the rapidly expanding low-carbon hydrogen industry.

The Ministerial Dialogue, which took place via video link and was livestreamed in its entirety, was attended by Ministers and senior representatives from Algeria, Egypt, Iraq, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, as well as from Japan, the UK COP26 Presidency and the United States.

The event served as a platform to share experiences between countries that are acutely affected not only by the direct impacts of global warming, but whose economies have a strong reliance on energy production and are uniquely vulnerable to the transition away from fossil fuels and towards cleaner energy sources.

Demand for the region’s oil and gas exports is expected to continue for many years to come. But participants in the Ministerial Dialogue noted that energy transitions linked to the world’s strengthening efforts to follow through on climate pledges will eventually entail a reduction in export revenues from fossil fuels. They also recognised that the Middle East and North Africa region needs a clear voice in the global climate change discussion in the run-up to COP26 in Glasgow in November.

“Covid-19 gave us a glimpse of what could happen when there’s a collapse in demand for oil,” said Iraq’s Deputy Prime Minister Ali Allawi, adding that his country’s economy had faced a “near-death experience” that necessitated immediate changes. He said producer economies had to adapt to new market dynamics associated with energy transitions, warning that inaction could lead to dramatic levels of damage in a region that is already facing serious climate, security and socioeconomic challenges.

Ministers highlighted the opportunities available for countries across the Middle East and North Africa to make energy transitions a key component of their broader economic plans, with Minister Sultan Al-Jaber of the United Arab Emirates telling the group that the “region has the resources, the experience and the vision to unlock huge economic potential from the transition to a lower carbon economy.”

"We need to work together to share knowledge and opinions to achieve our goals,” Omani Energy Minister Mohammed Al-Rumhi told participants.

IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol, who co-hosted the event with Minister Al-Rumhi, conveyed his hopes that the “atmosphere of cooperation and dialogue will result in the necessary steps being taken at Glasgow”. He stressed that the IEA stands ready to help countries across the Middle East and North Africa with technical support to accelerate their clean energy transitions.
The steep rise in European gas prices has been driven by a combination of a strong recovery in demand and tighter-than-expected supply, as well as several weather-related factors. These include a particularly cold and long heating season in Europe last winter, and lower-than-usual availability of wind energy in recent weeks.

European prices also reflect broader global gas market dynamics. There were strong cold spells in East Asia and North America in the first quarter of 2021. They were followed by heatwaves in Asia and drought in various regions, including Brazil. All of these developments added to the upward trend in gas demand. In Asia, gas demand has remained strong throughout the year, primarily driven by China, but also by Japan and Korea. On the supply side, liquefied natural gas (LNG) production worldwide has been lower than expected due to a series of unplanned outages and delays across the globe and delayed maintenance from 2020.

“Recent increases in global natural gas prices are the result of multiple factors, and it is inaccurate and misleading to lay the responsibility at the door of the clean energy transition,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol.

Going forward, the European gas market could well face further stress tests from unplanned outages and sharp cold spells, especially if they occur late in the winter. Gas storage levels in Europe are well below their five-year average but not markedly below their previous five-year lows, which were reached in 2017.

Based on the available information, Russia is fulfilling its long-term contracts with European counterparts – but its exports to Europe are down from their 2019 level. The IEA believes that Russia could do more to increase gas availability to Europe and ensure storage is filled to adequate levels in preparation for the coming winter heating season. This is also an opportunity for Russia to underscore its credentials as a reliable supplier to the European market.

European electricity prices have climbed to their highest levels in over a decade in recent weeks, rising above 100 euros per megawatt-hour in many markets. In Germany and Spain, for example, prices in September have been around three or four times the averages seen in 2019 and 2020. This increase has been driven by the surge in gas, coal and carbon prices in Europe. The strong rise in gas prices led electricity providers in a number of European markets to switch from gas to coal for power generation – a trend that would have been more pronounced if it had not been for the increase in the price of carbon emission allowances on the European market.

“Today’s situation is a reminder to governments, especially as we seek to accelerate clean energy transitions, of the importance of secure and affordable energy supplies – particularly for the most vulnerable people in our societies,” Dr Birol said. “Well-managed clean energy transitions are a solution to the issues that we are seeing in gas and electricity markets today – not the cause of them.”

The links between electricity and gas markets are not going to go away anytime soon. Gas remains an important tool for balancing electricity markets in many regions today. As clean energy transitions advance on a path towards net zero emissions, global gas demand will start to decline, but it will remain an important component of electricity security. This is especially the case in countries with large seasonal variations in electricity demand.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol spoke today to Energy Ministers from across Southeast Asia about the latest global and regional energy trends, pathways to net zero emissions and the importance of clean energy investment.

He was participating in the seventh annual dialogue between the IEA and Ministers from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) – the economic bloc comprised of 10 Southeast Asian economies. The meeting was hosted via video link by Brunei Darussalam, which is chairing ASEAN’s 39th annual Ministers on Energy Meeting (AMEM).

“The IEA remains firmly committed to assisting ASEAN and its member states in developing pathways towards net zero that respect their capacities and capabilities,” Dr Birol told the Ministers. “One of the key messages from the IEA’s Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050 Roadmap is that not all countries are starting the race to net zero from the same place. I have and will continue to underscore the importance of ensuring that a greater share of global clean energy investment is directed towards the emerging and developing economies including in Southeast Asia to unlock new economic growth possibilities and emissions reductions.’’

This year’s ministerial marks the tenth anniversary of IEA-ASEAN energy cooperation, which was established with a Memorandum of Understanding at the 2011 AMEM in Brunei’s capital, Bandar Seri Begawan. The Ministers and Dr Birol welcomed the adoption of a Commemorative Statement on IEA-ASEAN Energy Cooperation.

The IEA has significantly scaled up its work with ASEAN and its Member States over the past six years. Indonesia and Thailand became IEA Association Countries in 2015, and Singapore did so the following year. In 2019, under Thailand’s Chairmanship, the IEA was named a Strategic Partner of ASEAN.

The IEA is committed to continue working with ASEAN and its Member States on key energy priorities, including energy security, energy efficiency, clean energy, energy investments and decarbonisation.

“On this, the tenth anniversary of our collaboration, the IEA is more determined than ever to continue to work hand in hand with our partners in the region to help achieve your energy goals,’’ Dr Birol said. “I very much look forward to the next ten years.”



The ASEAN Chair in 2022 will be held by Cambodia.
Policies that introduce minimum efficiency performance standards and energy-consumption labelling on appliances and equipment have led to reduced power consumption, lower carbon emissions, and cost savings for consumers, according to analysis published today by the IEA and the 4E Technology Collaboration Programme (4E TCP).



The report’s findings are drawn from nearly 400 evaluation studies covering 100 countries, including those with the longest running and strongest appliance policies, such as China, European Union, Japan and the United States.

“The findings from the study are important as they provide evidence that standards and labelling are highly effective policy instruments that bring benefits to consumers as well as lower emissions and lower energy demand,” said Brian Motherway, the Head of Energy Efficiency at the IEA.

The study shows the policies have had significant positive impacts:

In countries with long-running policies, appliances are now typically consuming 30% less energy than they would have done otherwise.

In the nine countries/regions for which data were available, such programmes reduced annual electricity consumption by a total of around 1 580 terawatt-hours in 2018 – similar to the total electricity generation of wind and solar energy in those countries.

The programmes that have been operating the longest, such as those in the United States and the European Union, are estimated to deliver annual reductions of around 15% of their current total national electricity consumption. This percentage increases each year as more of the older, less-efficient stock is replaced with equipment that meets new higher efficiency standards.

These energy savings represent a significant financial boon for businesses and householders. In the United States alone, utility customers are now economising USD 60 billion each year, or USD 320 per customer.

Also, the United States, European Union and China together are avoiding annual CO2 emissions of more than 700 million tonnes, equivalent to the total energy-related emissions of Germany.

Well-designed policies encourage product innovation and lead to economies of scale, which reduces the cost of appliances even without accounting for the efficiency gains. For example, in Australia the sticker price of appliances has typically fallen 40% over the last 20 years, while average energy consumption has fallen by a third.

“The message is simple: expanding standards and energy efficiency labelling programmes makes the energy transition challenge easier, more affordable and become a reality,” said Jamie Hulan, the Chair of the 4E TCP.

The IEA will continue to collaborate with 4E TCP to enhance and promote the use of such policies. 4E TCP is an international platform for fourteen countries and the European Union to exchange technical and policy information focused on increasing the production and trade in efficient end-use equipment.

Ahead of this November’s COP26 Climate Change Conference, the IEA is working with the UK Government via the Super-Efficient Equipment and Appliance Deployment (SEAD) initiative to coordinate and improve international action on product energy efficiency. The United Kingdom is leading the COP26 Product Efficiency Call to Action, which aims to double the efficiency of key global products by 2030, initially focusing on four key energy-consuming products: air conditioners, refrigerators, lighting and industrial motors systems. The IEA is supporting the implementation of this work and helping expand the number of countries ready to make this commitment.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol has been named as one of the world’s 100 most influential people by Time in its closely watched annual list, highlighting the growing global impact of the IEA’s work on energy and climate issues under his leadership.

The Time 100 list, announced Wednesday, is now in its 18th year and recognises the impact, innovation and achievement of the most influential individuals across the globe.

“I’m humbled. This is an honour that I share with my dedicated colleagues at the IEA who have worked so tirelessly to help the world better understand how the energy sector can lead the fight against climate change,” said Dr Birol, who has served as Executive Director of the IEA since 2015. “Whatever influence I may have, I want to use it to help countries across the globe accelerate the clean energy transition in an affordable, just and secure way to give the world a fighting chance of limiting global warming to 1.5 °C – possibly the greatest challenge humanity has faced.”

In an article for the Time 100 list about Dr Birol, US Special Presidential Envoy John Kerry wrote: “In a world where facts are assaulted, Fatih Birol combines the best of high-tech data, optimistic know-how and old-school rhetorical finesse. A trusted counselor to world leaders, he’s an objective authority on what it will take to slash carbon emissions and save our planet.”

Secretary Kerry added: “Birol has transformed the International Energy Agency from a body mostly monitoring oil markets into a leading adviser to the world’s major economies across the full suite of energy technologies. Building on over 10 years of analysis, this year his IEA released its first comprehensive road map for reaching global net-zero emissions by 2050 and minimizing the risk of catastrophic climate impacts. Countries including India, China, Indonesia and Colombia have all asked him to chart road maps to speed climate action and reach net-zero emissions. When we get there, and if we get there in time, trust that Fatih Birol guided the course to turn words into reality.”
Brazil has significant opportunities to improve the energy intensity of its road freight sector, which is responsible for an estimated 13% of energy demand in the country, according to a report by the country’s Energy Research Office (EPE) that includes notable contributions from the IEA.



The report, Road Freight Transport: International Benchmarking, is being released today in English and Portuguese by the EPE, which advises Brazil’s Ministry of Mines and Energy. The IEA’s contributions to the report include technical analysis and case study development, highlighting the Agency’s strong cooperation with key institutions in this major emerging economy.

The analysis looks at how the efficiency of Brazil’s road freight sector over recent decades compares with those of other large economies. It outlines the impact of fuel efficiency, alternative fuels and modal shifts, as well as the influence of policies and programmes. It goes on to highlight international case studies that could provide insights for improving future policy in Brazil, where the road freight sector mainly consists of heavy duty vehicles.

The analysis results from close cooperation between the IEA and EPE, reflecting the value of detailed technical exchanges in helping inform decision-making. The two organisations have collaborated on several major publications in recent years, most recently in early 2021 when the IEA contributed two chapters to the Brazilian Atlas of Energy Efficiency. Brazil is the single largest energy consumer in South America, and one of eight IEA Association countries, which work closely with the Agency on important energy issues.

The Road Freight Transport: International Benchmarking report represents the ongoing success of the IEA’s work with EPE and other Brazilian institutions. Brazil is a key partner in the Agency’s Energy Efficiency in Emerging Economies (E4) programme, which seeks to build capacity within, and support for, energy efficiency improvements in some of the world’s largest energy-consuming countries. The IEA looks forward to continued collaboration with Brazil.

You can access the report in English here.

The Portuguese version is available here.
The Czech Republic needs to prepare for an earlier phase-out of coal than previously envisaged and develop low-carbon energy sources to replace it while taking steps to cushion the economic and social impacts in coal-producing regions, the International Energy Agency said today in its latest in-depth review of the country’s energy policies.

Currently, coal accounts for almost half of the Czech Republic’s power generation and a quarter of its residential heating demand, with coal set to continue to play an important role well into the 2030s under existing policies. But new European Union energy and climate policies including the “Fit for 55” package are likely to force an earlier phase-out, as rising prices for CO2 emissions will make coal less competitive compared with other sources of electricity and heat.

The phase-out of coal poses energy security challenges, as coal is domestically sourced and provides for dispatchable generation capacity. Continued diversification of energy sources is essential to ensure energy security while weaning the economy off coal. For this to happen, the economic potential of all forms of low-carbon generation must be assessed and roadmaps developed to exploit the most promising options. Moreover, the legal and regulatory framework will need to be adjusted to facilitate the emergence of new business models, such as local energy communities.

“I encourage the Czech government to start making better use of the various low-carbon energy sources that can help it transition in a secure way to a cleaner energy system and power its economy for decades to come,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director, who is launching the report today at an online event with Karel Havlicek, Minister for Industry and Trade of the Czech Republic.

“The shift from coal power to low-carbon alternatives must be done in a way that supports the people and communities impacted by the changes. In this context, I welcome the Czech government’s comprehensive framework for the economic restructuring and equitable transformation of the affected areas,” said Dr Birol.

The report finds that the phase-out of coal and coal mining in the Czech Republic poses economic and social challenges, as the sector is an important employer, particularly in regions with relatively weak economies. In order to ensure public support for its energy transition, the Czech Republic can make use of available European Union funds and mechanisms to help affected communities.

Since the IEA’s previous review of the Czech Republic’s policies in 2016, the country has improved its energy efficiency by deploying an increasing number of programmes, especially in the building and industry sectors. In particular, the IEA report welcomes the streamlining of administrative procedures to facilitate funding for energy efficiency measures in the residential sector. Looking towards 2030, the report recommends placing energy efficiency at the centre of the Czech Republic’s energy policy making.

Energy efficiency will help with the phase-out of coal by reducing concerns about heating and electricity generation adequacy. The report encourages the Czech government to study examples from other IEA countries and consider the creation of a dedicated energy efficiency agency for the implementation of its support programmes.

The report finds that declining coal consumption between 2009 and 2019 helped cut the Czech Republic’s energy-related CO2 emissions by 14%. It also led to a 15% reduction in the carbon intensity of the economy and a 22% drop in the carbon intensity of electricity and heat generation. For each indicator, however, the Czech Republic remains above the IEA average. The IEA report recommends that the Czech Republic make better use of carbon price signals to encourage the use of less carbon-intensive fuels and increase energy efficiency. The IEA recommends that the government redirect at least part of the carbon tax revenues to economically weaker households to alleviate the burden of this tax for them.




The IEA is working with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) to review Indonesia’s clean energy investment climate to identify barriers to financing its energy transition and provide policy recommendations for reducing or removing them.



Indonesia is already the world’s fourth most populous country, and its population and income are expected to grow considerably over the next decade. By 2045, Indonesia is predicted to be the world’s fifth largest economy, and as a result its energy consumption, and in particular electricity demand, are set to grow.

Several international organisations, NGOs and bilateral efforts are supporting the government’s efforts to meet much of this increase in demand through renewables, and it is important in this context to seek synergies between overlapping projects. Through the IEA’s Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging Economies programme, Randi Kristiansen joined the OECD’s review as a power sector expert and was one of the lead authors of the resulting report, Clean Energy Finance and Investment Policy Review of Indonesia. Ms Kristiansen’s contribution to the project was funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 952363.



Currently, coal dominates Indonesia’s electricity production, accounting for 59% of total generation in 2019. By 2030, Indonesia aims for 48% of its electricity generation to come from renewables, up from just 14% in 2020. In order to reach these Nationally Determined Contribution targets, the country needs to scale up investment in both renewables and in energy efficiency.

The review looks at the regulatory and procedural barriers in Indonesia that make it difficult for corporations to source renewables, as well as the lack of transparency that investors identify as a major barrier for investment. Indonesia’s upcoming Presidential Regulation for renewables will address some of these transparency issues, but it is important that it be followed up by clear implementation of regulations to make power purchasing agreement (PPA) contracts more transparent and bankable, according to the policy review. Increased investor confidence will reduce the required return on investment in Indonesia and thereby make the clean energy transitions faster and more affordable.

In order to learn more about how to accelerate clean energy investment in Indonesia, you can find the full report here.
The IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol attended the first-ever joint meeting of G20 energy and climate ministers in Naples today and discussed how to achieve net-zero emissions while fostering economic prosperity and ensuring energy security at the same time.

The Naples Ministerial, held under the G20 presidency of Italy and chaired by Italian Ecological Transitions Minister Roberto Cingolani, was an opportunity for policy makers from the world’s leading economies to discuss how to transition to clean and sustainable energy systems. The Italian Presidency had invited the IEA to be a strategic partner for its work on energy and climate, and had requested input from the IEA to inform discussions on sustainable recovery, investment and finance. These contributions were reflected in the ministers’ communiqué and related documents.

Dr Birol made several interventions during the Ministerial, stressing the need for urgent critical action and reinforced international cooperation just 100 days ahead of the COP26 summit in Glasgow.

“My message to G20 energy and climate leaders today in Naples is clear: A new global energy economy is emerging,” Dr Birol said. “We already have many of the technologies we need to reach net zero and we know innovation can help finish the job. International cooperation is key to succeed.”

The Executive Director had bilateral meetings with COP26 President Alok Sharma; Brazil’s Minister of Mines and Energy Bento Albuquerque; and, from Japan, Eiichiro Washio, the State Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Yasumasa Nagasaka, State Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry.

He also had several pull-aside meetings, including with Germany’s Economy Minister Peter Altmaier; the Netherlands’ Minister for Economic Affairs and Climate Policy Stef Blok; US Deputy Energy Secretary Dave Turk; the UNFCCC Executive Secretary Patricia Espinoza and Argentina’s Undersecretary for Energy Javier Papà.

On Thursday evening, he attended the pre-summit working dinner with Chair Minister Cingolani, the US Presidential Envoy for Climate John Kerry, European Commission Vice-President Frans Timmermans, Japan’s Environment Minister Shinjiro Koizumi and Spanish Ecology Minister, Teresa Ribera.

At the Ministerial, Dr Birol provided an overview of the current global energy and climate situation and unveiled the IEA’s new analysis on sustainable recovery, smart cities and energy security, which were produced at the invitation of the Italian Presidency.

Dr Birol reminded the audience that only 2% of recovery spending from Covid-19 has gone to sustainable energy, adding that this must rise significantly if countries were going to meet their energy and climate targets. This finding was part of the IEA’s new Sustainable Recovery Tracker, which monitors regularly governments’ fiscal responses to the pandemic.




The world’s cities can play a central role to accelerate progress towards clean, low-carbon, resilient and inclusive energy systems. This idea is recognized by climate and energy ministers from G20 nations who will meet under the presidency of Italy in Naples to focus on steps that national governments can take to support urban areas to deploy solutions and technologies to reduce emissions.

New technologies and increased connectivity, as well as the sheer scale of the world’s metropolises, are opening up massive opportunities to optimise urban planning, improve services and extend access, while at the same time creating revenue streams, jobs and business ventures. In this context, the International Energy Agency developed a report at the request of the Italian G20 presidency to showcase the opportunities and challenges facing cities, and the actions that can be taken to support progress.

The IEA’s Empowering Cities for a Net Zero Future builds on extensive consultations with over 125 leading experts and organisations, and presents case studies from 100 cities in 40 countries. The examples illustrate the wide range of opportunities and solutions that can help city-level authorities make full use of efficient and smart energy systems.

At the same time, urban agglomerations are incubators for cutting-edge technologies, and their density and size offer economies of scale that can cut the cost of infrastructure and innovation. This mix of factors puts cities at the leading edge to come up with creative solutions to climate and energy challenges.

And with growing urbanisation trends, the central role of cities will keep increasing. Cities today account for more than 50% of the planet’s population, 80% of its economic output, two-thirds of global energy consumption and more than 70% of annual global carbon emissions. By 2050, more than 70% of the world’s population will live in cities, resulting in a massive demand growth for urban energy infrastructure.

From smart streetlamps to self-cooling buildings to smart electric car chargers, investing in city-level action can provide the biggest carbon-mitigation return on investment and accelerate inclusive clean energy transitions.

The new report contains a set of high-level recommendations to accelerate energy transitions and leverage the full potential of cities to reduce emissions thanks to digitalisation.

By 2024, an anticipated 83 billion connected devices and sensors will be creating large, diverse datasets on a wide range of topics, such as energy consumption, air quality, and traffic patterns. Next-generation energy systems can leverage the data from these connected buildings, appliances and transportation systems to reduce energy consumption, improve grid stability and better manage city services.

For example, digital simulations can show how different designs, technologies and equipment affect energy demand pathways and associated costs. The LA100 study, conducted by the U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory, points the way towards achieving a 100% renewables-supplied city by 2045. The study simulates thousands of buildings, using aerial scans, customer adoption models as well as utility planning tools to ensure power system stability, and estimates that these measures would avoid between USD 472 million and USD 1.55 billion in distribution network investments.

The electricity consumed in street lighting globally is equivalent to Germany's total annual electricity consumption, and can constitute up to 65% of municipal electricity budgets. Yet only 3% of the globe’s 320 million street lighting poles are smart enabled, even though smart street lighting can reduce electricity use by up to 80% by adjusting output based on ambient light levels and weather. Smart street lamps can also monitor traffic, pedestrian crossings, and noise and air pollution, as well as incorporate electric car chargers and cell phone infrastructure.



India, under its National Streetlighting Programme, has reduced peak energy demand by more than 1000 MW thanks to 10 million smart LED streetlights. Digitalisation can also help improve maintenance. In Italy, an app developed by Enel X allows citizens to report street lighting faults using their smartphones.

To reduce congestion and greenhouse gas emissions, Jakarta’s Smart City initiative integrated public transport management and payment systems to help plan a more reliable, safe and affordable rapid bus transit system. Under PT JakLingko Indonesia, this comprehensive integration process increased the number of Transjakarta commuters from about 400 000 per day in December 2017 to just over 1 million per day in February 2020.

Vancouver, Canada, now requires every residential parking space in new developments to feature electricity outlets to charge electric vehicles. Meanwhile, digitalisation can shift around 60% of the generation capacity needed to charge these vehicles away from peak demand times. Smart traffic management systems can reduce congestion by 8%.

As economies recover from the Covid-19 pandemic, CO2 emissions are rebounding rapidly. The increase in global energy-related CO2 in 2021 could be the second largest in recorded history. Cities are the globe’s economic engine, and the solutions they seek can transform the energy landscape by creating new synergies to reduce emissions, improve energy efficiency, enhance resilience and provide a cleaner prosperous future for us all. Strong international cooperation and collaboration can play a crucial role in this, notably through emerging knowledge-sharing networks that span cities and countries.
Governments worldwide are deploying an unprecedented amount of fiscal support aimed at stabilising and rebuilding their economies, but only about 2% of this spending has been allocated to clean energy measures, according to new analysis from the International Energy Agency.

The sums of money, both public and private, being mobilised worldwide by recovery plans fall well short of what is needed to reach international climate goals. These shortfalls are particularly pronounced in emerging and developing economies, many of which face particular financing challenges.

Under governments’ current recovery spending plans, global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions are set to climb to record levels in 2023 and continue rising in the following years. This would leave the world far from the pathway to net-zero emissions by 2050 that the IEA set out in its recent Global Roadmap to Net Zero.

These findings come from the new Sustainable Recovery Tracker that the IEA launched today to help policy makers assess how far recovery plans are moving the needle on climate. The new online tool is a contribution to the G20 Ministerial Meeting on Environment, Climate and Energy in Naples, which takes place on 22 and 23 July under the Presidency of Italy.

The Tracker monitors government spending allocated to sustainable recoveries and then estimates how much this spending boosts overall clean energy investment and to what degree this affects the trajectory of global CO2 emissions. The Tracker considers over 800 national sustainable recovery policies in its analysis, which are publicly available on the IEA website.

“Since the Covid-19 crisis erupted, many governments may have talked about the importance of building back better for a cleaner future, but many of them are yet to put their money where their mouth is. Despite increased climate ambitions, the amount of economic recovery funds being spent on clean energy is just a small sliver of the total,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director.

Governments have mobilised USD 16 trillion in fiscal support throughout the Covid-19 pandemic, most of it focused on emergency financial relief for households and firms. Only 2% of the total is earmarked for clean energy transitions.

In the early phases of the pandemic, the IEA released the Sustainable Recovery Plan, which recommended USD 1 trillion of spending globally on clean energy measures that could feature prominently in recovery plans. According to the Plan – developed in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund – this spending would boost global economic growth, create millions of jobs and put the world on track to meet the Paris Agreement goals.

According to the Tracker, all the key sectors highlighted in the IEA Sustainable Recovery Plan are receiving inadequate attention from policy makers. Current government plans would only increase total public and private spending on clean energy to around USD 350 billion a year by 2023 – only 35% of what is envisaged in the Plan.

The Tracker shows the stark geographic disparities that are emerging in clean energy investment. The majority of funds are being mobilised in advanced economies, which are nearing 60% of the investment levels envisaged in the Sustainable Recovery Plan. Emerging and developing economies, many of which have limited fiscal leeway, have so far mobilised only about 20% of the recommended spending levels.

“Not only is clean energy investment still far from what’s needed to put the world on a path to reaching net-zero emissions by mid-century, it’s not even enough to prevent global emissions from surging to a new record. Many countries – especially those where the needs are greatest – are also missing the benefits that well planned clean energy investment brings, such as stronger economic growth, new jobs and the development of the energy industries of the future,” Dr Birol said

“Governments need to increase spending and policy action rapidly to meet the commitments they made in Paris in 2015 – including the vital provision of financing by advanced economies to the developed world,” Dr Birol added. “But they must then go even further by leading clean energy investment and deployment to much greater heights beyond the recovery period in order to shift the world onto a pathway to net-zero emissions by 2050, which is narrow but still achievable – if we act now.”
Meetings with US Energy Secretary, Special Presidential Climate Envoy, World Bank President, prominent Senators and other senior figures underscore need for greater international cooperation



During a weeklong visit to Washington, IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol met with a wide range of senior figures to discuss the opportunities and challenges of global clean energy transitions – and to prepare for a series of critical high-level meetings on climate and energy in the coming months, including the COP26 in November and the IEA Ministerial Meeting early next year.



The visit highlighted the increased importance of energy and climate on the policy agenda in the United States, the US government’s renewed determination to show international leadership on these crucial interlinked issues, and the central role that the IEA can play in providing a global platform for international collaboration. The need for greater global cooperation was a common theme during Dr Birol’s visit, with an emphasis on ensuring that the shift to a low-carbon future benefits all stakeholders while preventing the worst effects of climate change.

Among the dozens of engagements with senior energy and climate leaders in the Administration of President Joe Biden and in Congress, Dr Birol met with US Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm and Special Presidential Envoy for Climate John Kerry. These meetings both centred on how clean energy transitions could be a major driver of jobs and economic prosperity – with a clear sense of the urgency of shifting from ambition to implementation ahead of COP26 in Glasgow.

Discussions also covered the 2022 IEA Ministerial Meeting, which is due to take place in the first quarter of next year and will focus on modernising the IEA’s mandate and membership for the coming years. Ms Granholm will chair the Ministerial with the support of Vice-Chairs from Australia, Belgium and Denmark.



The importance of ensuring that energy transitions bring employment and prosperity was also underlined at meetings with World Bank President David Malpass, with discussions focusing on how the two institutions could expand their collaboration, especially in helping countries phase out coal power generation and manage the impact on communities and workers. In meeting with Brad Markell, who chairs the energy task force at the AFL-CIO trade union, the discussions centered on how to ensure that the transition to clean energy creates good jobs, and how to lessen any adverse impacts on workers.

Dr Birol discussed the same theme at another meeting with Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia, the Chairman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, and Secretary Granholm, and how to ensure the energy transition could bring jobs, growth and exports. Dr Birol also met with a variety of other congressional leaders, including Senator Ed Markey of Massachusetts, Senator Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island, and Senator Dan Sullivan of Alaska.

In addition to leading US figures, Dr Birol also met with Indian Ambassador to the United States Taranjit Singh Sandhu to discuss India’s impressive efforts to scale up renewables and how to further strengthen cooperation between the IEA and the Indian government. At an event hosted by Iraqi Ambassador Fareed Yasseen, Dr Birol discussed the special challenges and opportunities facing fossil fuel producers in the Middle East and North Africa, as well as the issues raised by the recent extreme heatwaves that have put huge strains on electricity systems in Iraq, the United States and many other countries. The event was attended by several ambassadors from producing countries, including Oman, with whom the IEA is organising a producers’ forum in September.
Renewables are expanding quickly but not enough to satisfy a strong rebound in global electricity demand this year, resulting in a sharp rise in the use of coal power that risks pushing carbon dioxide emissions from the electricity sector to record levels next year, says a new report from the International Energy Agency.



After falling by about 1% in 2020 due to the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic, global electricity demand is set to grow by close to 5% in 2021 and 4% in 2022 – driven by the global economic recovery – according to the latest edition of the IEA’s semi-annual Electricity Market Report released today. The majority of the increase in electricity demand is expected to come from the Asia Pacific region, primarily China and India.



Based on current policy settings and economic trends, electricity generation from renewables – including hydropower, wind and solar PV – is on track to grow strongly around the world over the next two years – by 8% in 2021 and by more than 6% in 2022. But even with this strong growth, renewables will only be able to meet around half the projected increase in global electricity demand over those two years, according to the new IEA report.

Fossil fuel-based electricity generation is set to cover 45% of additional demand in 2021 and 40% in 2022, with nuclear power accounting for the rest. As a result, carbon emissions from the electricity sector – which fell in both 2019 and 2020 – are forecast to increase by 3.5% in 2021 and by 2.5% in 2022, which would take them to an all-time high.



Renewable growth has exceeded demand growth in only two years: 2019 and 2020. But in those cases, it was largely due to exceptionally slow or declining demand, suggesting that renewables outpacing the rest of the electricity sector is not yet the new normal.



“Renewable power is growing impressively in many parts of the world, but it still isn’t where it needs to be to put us on a path to reaching net-zero emissions by mid-century,” said Keisuke Sadamori, the IEA Director of Energy Markets and Security. “As economies rebound, we’ve seen a surge in electricity generation from fossil fuels. To shift to a sustainable trajectory, we need to massively step up investment in clean energy technologies – especially renewables and energy efficiency.”



In the pathway set out in IEA’s recent Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050, nearly three-quarters of global emissions reductions between 2020 and 2025 take place in the electricity sector. To achieve this decline, the pathway calls for coal-fired electricity generation to fall by more than 6% a year.



However, coal-fired electricity generation is set to increase by almost 5% this year and by a further 3% in 2022, potentially reaching an all-time high, according to the Electricity Market Report. Gas-fired generation, which declined 2% in 2020, is expected to increase by 1% in 2021 and by nearly 2% in 2022. The growth of gas lags that of coal because it plays a smaller role in the fast-growing economies in the Asia Pacific region and it faces competition from renewables in Europe and North America.



Since the IEA’s last Electricity Market Report in December 2020, extreme cold, heat and drought have caused serious strains and disruptions to electricity systems across the globe – in countries ranging from the United States and Mexico to China and Iraq. In response, the IEA is establishing an Electricity Security Event Scale to track and classify major power outages, based on the duration of the disruption and the number of affected customers. The Texas power crisis in February, where millions of customers were without power for up to four days because of icy weather, was assigned the most severe rating on this scale.
The European Commission has launched the second phase of its EU4Energy programme, which promotes low-carbon and clean energy transitions in the Eastern Partnership (EaP), a joint initiative involving the European Union, its Members States and six Eastern European Partners: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine.



“Promoting the Clean Energy Transition in the Eastern Partnership Countries: EU4Energy Phase II” will run for the next four years and will help develop legislative and regulatory frameworks that support the region’s energy transformation and the liberalisation of its energy markets, as well the digitalisation of its energy systems. Beyond reducing emissions, the programme’s goal is to provide the citizens of the Eastern Partnership Countries with more stable and resilient energy supplies, empowering consumers and increasing energy security.



The International Energy Agency is a partner in the EU4Energy programme along with the Council of European Energy Regulators (CEER) and the Energy Community Secretariat (EnCS). The 8 July kick-off conference for the programme’s second phase includes country representatives from Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine who will share their knowhow and experience to further enhance cooperation in the energy sector within the region.
Portugal’s equitable and well-balanced plans for reaching a carbon-neutral economy should support the country’s economic growth and energy security, according to a new energy policy review by the International Energy Agency.

Portugal’s energy and climate policies aim to reach carbon neutrality primarily through broad electrification of energy demand and a rapid expansion of renewable electricity generation, along with increased energy efficiency. These measures are backed by a strong focus on reducing dependency on energy imports and maintaining affordable access to energy. In the longer term, Portugal is aiming for hydrogen to play a major role in achieving carbon neutrality.

“Portugal was among the first countries in the world to set a target for carbon neutrality by 2050, and its Roadmap for Carbon Neutrality shows a strong commitment to electrifying its economy and ensuring a secure and affordable energy transition,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director, who is launching the policy review today at an event with João Pedro Matos Fernandes, Portugal’s Minister for the Environment and Climate Action. “The IEA looks forwards to supporting the Portuguese government as it works on a fair and inclusive transition to a carbon-neutral economy.”

Portugal’s climate and energy goals still face notable challenges, the IEA policy review notes, with an economy that remains heavily reliant on imported fossil fuels today. The report welcomes steps the government is taking to address these challenges. An effective auction process for renewable energy projects should result in almost 2 gigawatts of new renewable generation coming online in the next few years, which will triple Portugal’s solar PV capacity.

Portugal is pushing to reduce oil demand and associated emissions through transport decarbonisation, with over EUR 10 billion of investments in electrified rail and public transport, favourable tax treatment for electric vehicles and support for charging infrastructure. Portugal is also taking a major step towards lowering emissions and reducing energy import dependency by phasing out coal-fired electricity generation in 2021.

Portugal sees a key role for hydrogen produced from renewable energy in hard-to-decarbonise sectors and for achieving carbon neutrality. The National Hydrogen Strategy sets a goal for hydrogen produced from renewable energy to cover 1.5-2% of Portugal’s energy demand by 2030, with use in industry, domestic maritime shipping, road transport and for injection into the natural gas network and potential exports.

“I congratulate Portugal for developing a broad policy framework with robust measures to achieve emission reductions,” Dr Birol said. “Portugal has found a good balance of ambitious targets and competitive support measures needed to drive a cost-effective energy transition.”




Natural gas demand is set to rebound strongly in 2021 and will keep rising further if governments do not implement strong policies to move the world onto a path towards net-zero emissions by mid-century, according to a new report by the International Energy Agency.



Global gas demand is expected to rise by 3.6% in 2021 before easing to an average growth rate of 1.7% over the following three years, according to the IEA’s latest quarterly Gas Market Report, which also provides a new medium-term forecast. By 2024, demand is forecast to be up 7% from 2019’s pre-Covid levels.



Natural gas demand growth in 2021 mostly reflects economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis, but it’s set to be driven in the following years in equal proportions by economic activity and by gas replacing other more polluting fuels such as coal and oil in sectors such as electricity generation, industry and transport. Almost half of the increase in gas demand between 2020 and 2024 comes from the Asia Pacific region.

Despite slower growth in the coming years, gas demand by 2024 is trending higher than the trajectories in the IEA’s climate-driven scenarios, notably the pathway set out in the recent

Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050. To get on track for net-zero emissions by 2050, new measures are needed to promote further fuel substitution and efficiency gains. This is especially the case in more mature markets, where much of the potential for switching from coal or oil to gas has already been realized.

“The rebound in gas demand shows that the global economy is recovering from the shock of the pandemic and that gas is continuing to replace more emissions-intensive fuels,” said Keisuke Sadamori, the IEA’s Director of Energy Markets and Security. “But stronger policies need to be implemented to put global gas demand on a path in line with reaching net-zero emissions by 2050 while still fostering economic prosperity. These include measures to ensure gas is used more efficiently. At the same time, the gas industry needs to significantly step up efforts to shift to cleaner and low-carbon gases – and to act quickly and effectively to address needless methane emissions.”

The new report examines how the gas industry can reduce its emissions footprint and align with net-zero emissions objectives. Key areas for action include continuing to reduce the intensity of the industry’s greenhouse gas emissions all along the value chain, supporting the development of low-carbon gases, and developing carbon management solutions to minimise emissions from combustion. In particular, reducing methane emissions is an efficient way – in terms of both time and cost – of narrowing the industry’s footprint.

The increased demand forecast in the report can be met by conventional assets that were already approved or under development before the pandemic, mainly in Russia and the Middle East. Supply is also likely to be supplemented by new investment in US shale gas production to support export capacity for liquefied natural gas (LNG) that is currently under development. The report notes the contribution of LNG to ensuring flexible and secure supplies, especially from the United States, which accounts for the large majority of additional LNG capacity to be commissioned in the coming three years. Robust growth of the LNG carrier fleet will also make supplies more adjustable, with current order books representing a 25% increase in the vessel count in the next two to three years. Underground storage capacity, another pivotal source of flexibility, is set to increase by 7% over the forecast period.

However, without strong policy measures to curb gas demand in the long term, market volatility and concerns over security of supply may arise towards the end of the report’s forecast period.
Azerbaijan would benefit from energy market reforms, efficiency requirements and more clean energy to prepare for energy transitions both at home and abroad, according to a new policy review by the International Energy Agency.



While oil and gas will continue to dominate both Azerbaijan’s economy and its energy supply in the medium term, commitments taken by its leading trading partners to achieve net-zero emissions raise questions about the long-term demand for the country’s fossil fuel exports, the IEA report says.



The policy review recognises that Azerbaijan currently contributes to global energy security through its role as a reliable exporter, noting examples such as the recently completed Southern Gas Corridor that supplies Azerbaijani gas to Europe. At the same time, the report underlines the need for Azerbaijan to prepare its economy and energy system for accelerating clean energy transitions around the world.

The new report proposes several ways Azerbaijan can make its energy supply and consumption more efficient and diverse. The overarching recommendation is to gradually shift from the current energy system to one based on competitive markets, significant private sector participation and prices that cover operating costs.

Azerbaijan’s government has recently drafted proposals for electricity and gas market reforms, as well as laws on energy efficiency and renewable energy. The report encourages Azerbaijan to move swiftly to adopt all these proposals and to ensure their effective implementation.

Tariffs are a critical issue for electricity and gas markets. Low levels of tariffs, often below the full cost of supply, lead to distortions and inefficiencies in the heat and electricity sectors. The policy review makes the case for phasing out the implied subsidies while recommending support measures for financially vulnerable households.

Successful electricity and gas market reforms would also attract new entrants and investment in the renewable electricity sector. Azerbaijan has recently started to develop its world-class potential for solar and wind power. The IEA policy review recommends Azerbaijan to be ambitious, and welcomes the government’s plans to raise the share of renewable energy in total generating capacity from 16% in 2018 to 30% in 2030.

Azerbaijan has plenty of scope to improve its energy efficiency. The new report strongly encourages the government to recognise that greater energy efficiency can benefit the economy, reduce pollution and create jobs. The report therefore recommends the rapid adoption of the laws, strategies, policies and measures needed to realise this potential.

Measures to diversify energy supply, cut subsidies and increase efficiency would also help reduce greenhouse gas emissions. With further economic growth and urbanisation expected in Azerbaijan, the report encourages the government to integrate energy and climate aspects into long-term urban development and transport planning.
The growth of hydropower plants worldwide is set to slow significantly this decade, putting at risk the ambitions of countries across the globe to reach net-zero emissions while ensuring reliable and affordable energy supplies for their citizens, according to a new report by the International Energy Agency.

Hydropower today has a key role in the transition to clean energy not only through the massive quantities of low-carbon electricity it produces but also because of its unmatched capabilities for providing flexibility and storage. Many hydropower plants can ramp their electricity generation up and down very rapidly compared with other power plants such as nuclear, coal and natural gas. This makes sustainable hydropower an attractive foundation for integrating greater amounts of wind and solar power, whose output can vary, depending on factors like the weather and the time of day or year.

Global hydropower capacity is expected to increase by 17% between 2021 and 2030 – led by China, India, Turkey and Ethiopia – according to the Hydropower Special Market Report, part of the IEA’s Renewables market report series. However, the projected growth for the 2020s is nearly 25% slower than hydropower’s expansion in the previous decade.

Reversing the expected slowdown will require a range of strong policy actions from governments to address the major challenges that are hampering faster deployment of hydropower, according to the report. These measures include providing long-term visibility on revenues to ensure hydropower projects are economically viable and sufficiently attractive to investors, while still ensuring robust sustainability standards.

In 2020, hydropower supplied one sixth of global electricity generation, making it the single largest source of low-carbon power – and more than all other renewables combined. Its output has increased 70% over the past two decades, but its share of global electricity supply has held steady because of the increases in wind, solar PV, natural gas and coal. Nonetheless, hydropower currently meets the majority of electricity demand across 28 different emerging and developing economies, which have a total population of 800 million.

“Hydropower is the forgotten giant of clean electricity, and it needs to be put squarely back on the energy and climate agenda if countries are serious about meeting their net zero goals,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “It brings valuable scale and flexibility to help electricity systems adjust quickly to shifts in demand and to compensate for fluctuations in supply from other sources. Hydropower’s advantages can make it a natural enabler of secure transitions in many countries as they shift to higher and higher shares of solar and wind – provided that hydropower projects are developed in a sustainable and climate-resilient way.”

The IEA special report is the first study to provide detailed global forecasts to 2030 for the three main types of hydropower: reservoir, run-of-river and pumped storage facilities. Around half of hydropower’s economically viable potential worldwide is untapped, and this potential is particularly high in emerging economies and developing economies, where it reaches almost 60%.

Based on today’s policy settings, China is set to remain the single largest hydropower market through 2030, accounting for 40% of global expansion, followed by India. However, China’s share of global hydropower additions has been declining due to the decreasing availability of economically attractive sites and growing concerns over social and environmental impacts.

Between now and 2030, USD 127 billion – or almost one-quarter of global hydropower investment – is set to be spent on modernising ageing plants, mostly in advanced economies. This is notably the case in North America, where the average age of a hydropower plant is nearly 50 years, and in Europe, where it’s 45 years. Still, the projected investment falls well short of the USD 300 billion that the report estimates is necessary to modernise all ageing hydropower plants worldwide.

While hydropower remains economically attractive in many regions of the world, the report highlights a number of major challenges it faces. New hydropower projects often face long lead times, lengthy permitting processes, high costs and risks from environmental assessments, and opposition from local communities. These pressures result in higher investment risks and financing costs compared with other power generation and storage technologies, thereby discouraging investors.

The IEA report sets out seven key priorities for governments looking to accelerate the deployment of hydropower in a sustainable way. These include locking in long-term pricing structures and ensuring that hydropower projects adhere to strict guidelines and best practices. This kind of approach can minimise sustainability risks and maximise social, economic and environmental advantages.

If governments address the hurdles to faster deployment appropriately, global hydropower capacity additions could be 40% higher through 2030 by unblocking existing project pipelines, according to the accelerated case presented in the report. But to put the world on a pathway to net-zero emissions by 2050, as set out in the IEA’s recent Global Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050, governments would need to raise their hydropower ambitions drastically. In fact, global hydropower capacity would need to grow twice as fast through 2030 as it is expected to do in the report’s main forecast. A much stronger and all-encompassing policy approach would be required to achieve this.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol held a wide-ranging and detailed discussion today with China’s Special Envoy on Climate Change Xie Zhenhua during which they addressed major energy and climate issues, including the findings of the IEA’s recent Global Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050.

As one of the main architects of the Paris Agreement, Mr Xie is now playing a key role in China’s engagement with other leading economies such as the United States and the European Union in the lead-up to the COP26 Climate Change Conference in Glasgow in November. China has said it aims to achieve a peak in emissions before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060.

Mr Xie congratulated the IEA on its significant contributions to global energy and climate discussions, in particular through the Net Zero by 2050 Roadmap, which was released globally on 18 May. The findings of the report were subsequently presented to senior Chinese policy makers and a large online audience in China at a special event on 8 June. Mr Xie highlighted that the report has many practical recommendations for policy makers that are in line with the spirit of the Paris Agreement.

Mr Xie also commended the insights of the IEA’s recent special report on Financing Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging and Developing Economies. He and Dr Birol agreed there is an important role for international financial institutions and other relevant organisations in helping mobilise and channel the capital flows needed to fund clean energy transitions in the developing world.

Dr Birol and Mr Xie discussed the need for governments to provide the right incentives to create an inclusive energy transition in which countries can play to their strengths and give the right signals to investors. The whole of society will need to play a role in realising net zero goals, they agreed.

They both stressed the strong need for greater international collaboration and global sharing of best practices in order to accelerate clean energy transitions. Mr Xie said that the IEA has an important role in helping the world to realise the Paris Agreement goals. The IEA’s technical cooperation and inputs with China on important areas like emissions trading, transition pathways, energy efficiency, energy data and expansion and integration of renewables were highly regarded and appreciated, he said.

Mr Xie outlined how China is taking new initiatives and making new investments, not just in renewable energy, but also in areas such as transport, infrastructure, hydrogen and industrial sectors with the aim of developing a low-carbon, circular economy. China’s carbon emissions trading system will start its first national trades in the coming weeks.
The second meeting of the Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions took place today, bringing together 25 high-profile energy and climate figures from around the world to assess how to ensure that the transition to clean energy is fair and inclusive for everyone.

The virtual meeting of the Global Commission was chaired by Dan Jørgensen, Denmark’s Minister of Climate, Energy and Utilities. The Global Commission, which was convened in January by IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol, is led by the Danish Prime Minster Mette Frederiksen, chaired by Minster Jørgensen and co-chaired by Sophie Gladima, Senegal’s Minister of Petroleum and Energy. It is made up of national leaders, government ministers, civil society representatives and other prominent figures working together to identify key actions in delivering people-centred and inclusive clean energy transitions.

“Clean energy transitions are about people, and for people, and will fail if they are not people-centred,” said Dr Birol. “There is no reason why any adverse impacts cannot be properly addressed if governments take the right actions based on sound policies that reflect their unique national circumstances. Public support is essential for a successful energy transition that can build a cleaner, more prosperous future and prevent the worst effects of climate change.”

The participants in the meeting stressed the importance of ensuring people benefit through the creation of good quality jobs in clean energy, and of protecting workers and communities that are negatively affected by employment shifts and job losses. They also underscored the importance of achieving universal access to clean, affordable and reliable energy worldwide as an integral part of energy transitions. And they recognised that while countries’ efforts to transform their energy systems present common challenges, local circumstances also need to be taken into account.





Today’s gathering continued the discussion from the Commission’s first meeting on 15 March, maintaining a focus on creating jobs, encouraging public participation, and enhancing social and economic development, equity and inclusion. The discussions were enriched by the IEA’s recent analysis presented in its special report on Financing Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging and Developing Economies, as well as by the employment analysis in Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector.





Today’s meeting was a key moment for Commission members to share their views, preferences and points of concern on major issues ahead of the development of recommendations for the COP26 Climate Change Conference that will take place in Glasgow starting 31 October. These inputs and recommendations will be finalised at the Commission’s third meeting in October.





As it continues its work, the Commission is seeking public input for its policy proposals, specifically through a public opinion survey available in English, Spanish and French here.





The Commission’s first meeting on 15 March provided crucial input for the IEA-COP26 Net Zero Summit on 31 March, where energy and climate leaders from more than 40 countries backed further action to cut carbon emissions, and highlighted the economic opportunities presented by clean energy transitions.

The Commission will organise two public webinars in July: one high-level event exploring the role of labour in our inclusive energy future, and one on behavioural insights for inclusive clean energy transitions.

The Commission’s most recent public webinar on “Best Practice in People-Centred Policymaking” brought together Ministers from Canada, Senegal, Switzerland and Colombia; the European Commissioner for Energy; and the Special Advisor on Climate to the UN Secretary General.

The video of event is available to watch here.
The oil and gas producing economies of the Middle East and North Africa are particularly affected by climate change, and Ministers from the region will explore ways to leverage clean energy transitions to ensure broader economic resilience at a Ministerial Dialogue on 9 September organised by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals of the Sultanate of Oman and the International Energy Agency.

The Ministerial Dialogue – which will be co-hosted by Oman’s Minister of Energy and Minerals Mohammed bin Hamad Al-Rumhi and IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol – will address the particular challenges that energy transitions present for economies in the Middle East and North Africa, as well as the tangible opportunities for those countries to increase economic resilience and prosperity for the region and its people.

Not only is the Middle East and North Africa region warming at a significantly faster rate than the global average, but the region’s exports are uniquely vulnerable to energy market shifts resulting from global efforts to mitigate climate change. If oil and gas demand were to decline as much as implied in the IEA’s Global Roadmap to Net-Zero Emissions by 2050, then producer economies’ net incomes from oil and gas could fall to just one-fifth of their current levels in the next three decades. The loss of these revenues would pose substantial risks for undiversified economies.

However, economies in the region are well placed to leverage their existing capacities and competitive advantages in clean energy technologies. This could help satisfy their own growing energy demand and potentially open new export opportunities for emerging low-carbon energy sectors, such as hydrogen. Countries in the region have some of the best solar resources in the world, and recent prices obtained at auction attest to significant further potential. Meanwhile, growing energy demand in the region could be mitigated through increased investment in energy efficiency, which would have the added benefit of creating high-value private-sector jobs, a crucial consideration in a region where high unemployment is a serious issue.

The Ministerial Dialogue on 9 September will address these and other key themes for the region. More details will be announced in due course.
IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol congratulated the leaders of the Group of Seven (G7) nations for their landmark Summit at which they committed to reaching net-zero emissions by 2050 and made a series of other significant energy and climate pledges.

G7 leaders concluded the closely watched Summit on Sunday, issuing a communiqué in which they set out their net zero commitments and called on all countries, in particular major emitting economies, “to join us in these goals as part of a global effort.” In this context, the leaders noted the IEA’s “clear roadmap” for achieving net zero globally by 2050.

“I’m very proud to see recognition of the IEA’s comprehensive Roadmap for the global energy sector to reach this critical and formidable goal,” said Dr Birol. “The IEA looks forward to helping governments design and implement the strong policy actions that are needed to move the world onto a narrow yet achievable pathway to net zero by 2050. In the lead-up to COP26 in November, I look forward to seeing additional firm commitments to improve and increase clean energy financing for developing economies.”

The communiqué said that G7 leaders had committed to aligning official international financing with the global achievement of net zero greenhouse gas emissions no later than 2050 and for deep emissions reductions in the 2020s.

The IEA’s Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050 was released on 18 May. It is the world’s first comprehensive study of how to transition to a net zero energy system globally by 2050 while ensuring stable and affordable energy supplies, providing universal energy access, and enabling robust economic growth. In the pathway laid out in the IEA Roadmap, strong and credible policy actions by governments around the world drive a historic surge in clean energy investment and deployment, thereby reducing demand for fossil fuels, creating millions of new jobs and lifting global economic growth.

The G7 countries are Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States. Leaders of the countries have gathered together annually since the 1970s, alongside the heads of the European Union. This year’s Summit was hosted by the United Kingdom.
The IEA is working with the Clean Energy International Incubation Centre (CEIIC) to support CEIIC’s evaluation of applicants to the Techtonic — Innovations in Clean Energy Challenge.

Techtonic is a new start-up challenge established in India for clean energy innovators. It invites disruptive solutions in clean energy driving climate action and improving the lives and livelihoods of marginal communities deeply affected by the global scourge. It is run by Social Alpha, and is backed by the Government of India via its support for CEIIC and Atal Incubation Centres. It was launched on 15 February 2021 and, as a knowledge partner, the IEA helped to promote the initiative internationally. Applicants from all over the world were eligible to apply, further establishing the initiative as a key contribution of India to supporting international co‑operation on clean energy innovation through Mission Innovation.

Following the receipt of 195 applications from start-ups and would-be entrepreneurs possessing exciting clean energy technologies, 77 enterprises passed the first screening stage, meeting eight criteria: affordability, accessibility, user experience, innovation impact potential, problem-solution fit, scalability, business viability and team strength.

Emerging markets and developing economies currently account for around two-thirds of the world’s carbon emissions, and their share is rising, making adoption of clean energy technologies a critical imperative for achieving global sustainable development goals, according to a new IEA report, Financing Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging and Developing Economies. The IEA projects that annual clean energy investment in these countries will need to increase by more than seven times, to over USD 1 trillion, by 2030 if global net zero emissions are to be reached by 2050. This would represent more than 40% of total global energy investment to 2050.

India possesses a very strong entrepreneurial business acumen, which can provide a foundation for energy innovation ecosystems that attract venture capital funds and other sources of finance. Techtonic, supported by the Government of India, is one of a number of initiatives worldwide in which the public sector is actively nurturing the next generation of energy innovators to power tomorrow’s economy.

As a knowledge partner, the IEA is providing technical input on the needs and opportunities for the technologies represented by the 77 candidate applicants (The IEA has no role in the evaluation of the applicant companies). Co‑ordinated by the IEA’s Amalia Pizarro, this input draws on IEA expertise in across the full range of sectors in the IEA ETP Clean Energy Technology Guide. It includes an assessment of whether the clean energy technologies address likely barriers to scale-up, compatibility with a global net zero emissions future and the potential contribution to energy access. Dr. Pizarro’s contribution to the project was funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 952363.

In order to learn more about how to accelerate clean energy innovation, see the IEA Special Report on Clean Energy Innovation, the Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging Economies and Innovation topic pages.

Update 15 June 2021: Announcement of 32 finalists

Update 9 July 2021: Announcement of 17 winners





This article has been produced with the financial assistance of the European Union as part of the Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging Economies programme. This article refects the views of the International Energy Agency (IEA) Secretariat, but does not necessarily reflect those of the individual IEA member countries of the European Union (EU). Neither the IEA nor the EU make any representation or warranty express or implied, in respect to the article's contents (including its completeness or accuracy) and shall not be responsible for any use of, or reliance on, the publication.

The Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging Economies programme has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 952363.
The world’s energy and climate future increasingly hinges on whether emerging and developing economies are able to successfully transition to cleaner energy systems, calling for a step change in global efforts to mobilise and channel the massive surge in investment that is required, according to a new report by the International Energy Agency.

The special report – carried out in collaboration with the World Bank and the World Economic Forum – sets out a series of actions to enable these countries to overcome the major hurdles they face in attracting the financing to build the clean, modern and resilient energy systems that can power their growing economies for decades to come.

Annual clean energy investment in emerging and developing economies needs to increase by more than seven times – from less than USD 150 billion last year to over $1 trillion by 2030 to put the world on track to reach net-zero emissions by 2050, according to the report, Financing Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging and Developing Economies. Unless much stronger action is taken, energy-related carbon dioxide emissions from these economies – which are mostly in Asia, Africa and Latin America – are set to grow by 5 billion tonnes over the next two decades.

“In many emerging and developing economies, emissions are heading upwards while clean energy investments are faltering, creating a dangerous fault line in global efforts to reach climate and sustainable energy goals,’’ said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “Countries are not starting on this journey from the same place – many do not have access to the funds they need to rapidly transition to a healthier and more prosperous energy future – and the damaging effects of the Covid-19 crisis are lasting longer in many parts of the developing world.”

“There is no shortage of money worldwide, but it is not finding its way to the countries, sectors and projects where it is most needed,” Dr Birol said. “Governments need to give international public finance institutions a strong strategic mandate to finance clean energy transitions in the developing world.”

Recent trends in clean energy spending point to a widening gap between advanced economies and the developing world even though emissions reductions are far more cost-effective in the latter. Emerging and developing economies currently account for two-thirds of the world’s population, but only one-fifth of global investment in clean energy, and one-tenth of global financial wealth. Annual investments across all parts of the energy sector in emerging and developing markets have fallen by around 20% since 2016, and they face debt and equity costs that are up to seven times higher than in the United States or Europe.

Avoiding a tonne of CO2 emissions in emerging and developing economies costs about half as much on average as in advanced economies, according to the report. That is partly because developing economies can often jump straight to cleaner and more efficient technologies without having to phase out or refit polluting energy projects that are already underway.

But emerging market and developing economies seeking to increase clean energy investment face a range of difficulties, which can undermine risk-adjusted returns for investors and the availability of bankable projects. Challenges involve the availability of commercial arrangements that support predictable revenues for capital-intensive investments, the creditworthiness of counterparties and the availability of enabling infrastructure, among other project-level factors. Broader issues, including depleted public finances, currency instability and weaknesses in local banking and capital markets also raise challenges to attracting investment.

“A major catalyst is needed to make the 2020s the decade of transformative clean energy investment,” said Dr Birol. “The international system lacks a clear and unified focus on financing emissions reductions and clean energy – particularly in emerging and developing economies. Today’s strategies, capabilities and funding levels are well short of where they need to be. Our report is a global call to action – especially for those who have the wealth, resources and expertise to make a difference – and offers priority actions that can be taken now to move things forward fast.”

These priority actions – for governments, financial institutions, investors and companies – cover the period between now and 2030, drawing on detailed analysis of successful projects and initiatives across clean power, efficiency and electrification, as well as transitions for fuels and emissions-intensive sectors. These include almost 50 real-world case studies across different sectors in countries ranging from Brazil to Indonesia, and from Senegal to Bangladesh.

"As we expand energy access, we also need a global transition to low-carbon energy. It is critical to develop solutions that make energy systems more resilient to climate change and other crises. With the right policies and investments, countries can achieve lasting economic growth and poverty reduction without degrading the environment or aggravating inequality. The broader financial sector can and must play a key role in achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement by mobilizing capital for green and low-carbon investments, while managing climate risks. The World Bank will continue to support countries that seek assistance to transition away from fossil fuels and scale up low-carbon, renewable energy, and energy efficiency investments," said Demetrios Papathanasiou, the World Bank Global Director for Energy and Extractives.

“The need to scale clean energy in emerging economies offers a massive investment opportunity. This report shows that current challenges to get this capital to the right places can be overcome through a combination of smart policies, financial innovation, as well as bold collective action. The World Economic Forum is committed to enabling multistakeholder cooperation to accelerate progress in this important area, said Børge Brende, President of the World Economic Forum.

The report calls for a focus on channelling and facilitating investment into sectors where clean technologies are market-ready, especially in the areas of renewables and energy efficiency, but also laying the groundwork for scaling up low-carbon fuels and industrial infrastructure needed to decarbonise rapidly growing and urbanising economies. It also calls for strengthening sustainable finance frameworks, addressing barriers on foreign investment, easing procedures for licensing and land acquisition, and rolling back policies that distort local energy markets.

The report underscores that clean energy investments and activities can bring substantial economic opportunities and jobs in industries that are expected to flourish in the coming decades as energy transitions accelerate worldwide. It calls for clean energy transitions to be people‐centred and inclusive, including actions that build equitable and sustainable models for universal access to modern energy. Spending on more efficient appliances, electric vehicles, and energy‐efficient buildings can provide further employment opportunities, and can especially support the role of women and female entrepreneurs in driving change and improved gender equality.
During the last decade, a greater share of the global population gained access to electricity than ever before, but the number of people without electricity in Sub-Saharan Africa actually increased. Unless efforts are scaled up significantly in countries with the largest deficits the world will still fall short of ensuring universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern energy by 2030, according to Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Progress Report released today by the International Energy Agency (IEA) the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA), the World Bank, and the World Health Organization (WHO).

According to the report, significant progress has been made since 2010 on various aspects of the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 7, but progress has been unequal across regions. While more than one billion people gained access to electricity globally over the last decade, COVID’s financial impact has made basic electricity services unaffordable for 30 million more people, the majority located in Africa. Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Ethiopia had the biggest electricity access deficits, with Ethiopia replacing India in the Top 3.

Globally, the number of people without access to electricity declined from 1.2 billion in 2010 to 759 million in 2019. Electrification through decentralized renewable-based solutions in particular gained momentum. The number of people connected to mini grids has more than doubled between 2010 and 2019, growing from 5 to 11 million people. However, under current and planned policies and further affected by the COVID-19 crisis, an estimated 660 million people would still lack access in 2030, most of them in Sub-Saharan Africa.

At the same time, some 2.6 billion people remained without access to clean cooking in 2019, one third of the global population. Largely stagnant progress since 2010 leads to millions of deaths each year from breathing cooking smoke, and without rapid action to scale up clean cooking the world will fall short of its target by 30 percent come 2030. The state of access in the Sub-Saharan African region is characterized by population growth outpacing gains in the number of people with access, so that 910 million in the region lack access to clean cooking. The top 20 access-deficit countries account for 81 percent of the global population without access to clean fuels and technologies. Of these, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Mozambique, Niger, Uganda and Tanzania had less or equal to 5 percent of their populations with access to clean cooking. On a positive note, Indonesia, Cambodia and Myanmar have made gains each year over the report period.

The report examines various ways to bridge the gaps to reach SDG7, chief among them the goal of significantly scaling up renewables - which have proven more resilient than other parts of the energy sector during the COVID-19 crisis. While renewable energy has seen unprecedented growth over the last decade, its share of total final energy consumption remained steady as global energy consumption grew at a similar rate. Renewables are most dynamic in the electricity sector, reaching around 25 percent in 2018, while progress in the heat and transport sectors have been much slower.

More than one third of the increase in renewable energy generation in 2018 can be attributed to East Asia – driven by large uptakes of solar and wind energy in China. The largest country-level advances in renewable energy in 2018 were observed in Spain, owing to higher hydropower generation, followed by Indonesia where a rapid uptake of bioenergy for power generation played a substantial role. To significantly increase the share of renewable energy in line with the SDG 7 target, current efforts need to accelerate in all end-use sectors to scale uptake of renewables while containing total energy demand.

Energy intensity improvements (a proxy for energy efficiency) are moving further away from the target set under SDG7 for 2030. The rate of global primary energy intensity improvement in 2018 was 1.1 percent compared to 2017, the lowest average annual rate of improvement since 2010. The annual improvement until 2030 will now need to average 3 percent if we are to meet the goal.

Accelerating the pace of progress across all regions and indicators will require stronger political commitment, long-term energy planning, and adequate policy and scale incentives to spur faster uptake of sustainable energy solutions. Although clean energy investments continue to be sourced primarily from the private sector, the public sector remains a major source of financing and is central in leveraging private capital, particularly in developing countries and in a post-COVID context. One of the newest indicators in the report, international public financial flows to developing countries, shows that international financial support continue to be concentrated in a few countries and failing to reach many of those most in need. Flows to developing countries in support of clean and renewable energy reached $14 billion in 2018, with a mere 20 percent going to the least-developed countries, which are the furthest from achieving the various SDG7 targets. An increased emphasis on “leaving no one behind” is required in the years ahead.

This is the seventh edition of this report, formerly known as the Global Tracking Framework (GTF). This year’s edition was chaired by the United Nations Statistics Division.

The report this year comes at a crucial time as Governments and stakeholders are gearing up for the UN High-level Dialogue on Energy, a summit-level meeting in September 2021 that will examine steps needed to achieve SDG7 by 2030 and mobilize voluntary commitments and actions in the form of Energy Compacts.

Funding for the report was provided by the World Bank’s Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP).
Global investment in energy is set to rebound by nearly 10% in 2021 to USD 1.9 trillion, reversing most of last year’s drop caused the Covid-19 pandemic, but spending on clean energy transitions needs to accelerate much more rapidly to meet climate goals, according to a new report from the International Energy Agency.



With energy investment returning to pre-crisis levels, its composition is continuing to shift towards electricity: 2021 is on course to be the sixth year in a row that investment in the power sector exceeds that in traditional oil and gas supply, according to the World Energy Investment 2021 report.

Global power sector investment is set to increase by around 5% in 2021 to more than USD 820 billion, its highest ever level, after staying flat in 2020. Renewables are dominating investment in new power generation capacity and are expected to account for 70% of the total this year. And that money now goes further than ever in financing clean electricity, with a dollar spent on solar PV deployment today resulting in four times more electricity than ten years ago, thanks to greatly improved technology and falling costs.



“The rebound in energy investment is a welcome sign, and I’m encouraged to see more of it flowing towards renewables,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director. “But much greater resources have to be mobilised and directed to clean energy technologies to put the world on track to reach net-zero emissions by 2050. Based on our new Net Zero Roadmap, clean energy investment will need to triple by 2030.”



While renewables dominate new power investment, and approvals for coal-fired plants are some 80% below where they were five years ago, coal is not out of the picture. There was even a slight increase in go-aheads for coal-fired plants in 2020, driven by China and some other Asian economies.



Upstream oil and gas investment is expected to rise by about 10% in 2021 as companies recover financially from the shock of 2020, but their spending remains well below pre-crisis levels. The new report highlights the diverging strategies among different oil and gas companies. The majors are holding oil and gas spending flat on aggregate in 2021, despite recovering prices. Meanwhile, some national oil companies are stepping up investment, raising the possibility of increased market share if demand continues to grow. Qatar’s decision to move ahead with the world’s largest liquefied natural gas (LNG) expansion, and to include carbon capture technologies in this investment, is a strong signal of its intent to maintain a leadership position in LNG.



There are signs in the latest data that spending by some global oil and gas companies is starting to diversify. IEA analysis last year highlighted that only around 1% of capital spending by the industry was going to clean energy investments. But project tracking to date in 2021 suggests that this could rise to 4% this year for the industry as a whole, and well above 10% for some of the leading European companies.



The influence of recovery packages and new climate policy measures comes through in expectations of rising expenditure in 2021 on renewable power, electricity grids, energy efficiency – notably in the buildings sector in Europe – and emerging technologies such as carbon capture, utilisation and storage and low-carbon hydrogen. The United States may provide further momentum if the infrastructure plan proposed by the administration of President Joe Biden is enacted.

Financial markets are also providing encouraging signs for clean energy investment. Sustainable debt issuance reached a record level in 2020, and renewable power companies have outperformed fossil fuel companies on international equity markets. But even though spending on clean energy is set to rise in 2021 by around 7%, the report notes that growth in these capital expenditures has lagged changes in financial markets, in part due to a shortage of high-quality clean energy investment opportunities and appropriate channels for allocating capital into projects.



The anticipated USD 750 billion to be spent on clean energy technologies and efficiency in 2021 is encouraging but remains far below what’s required to put the energy system on a sustainable path. Clean energy investment would need to triple in the 2020s to put the world on track to reach net-zero emissions by 2050, thereby keeping the door open for a 1.5 °C stabilisation of the rise in global temperatures.



“As set out in detail in our recent Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050, governments need to go beyond making pledges to cut emissions and take concrete steps to accelerate investments in market-ready clean energy solutions and promote innovation in early-stage technologies,” said Dr Birol. “Clear policy signals from governments would reduce the uncertainties associated with clean energy investments and provide investors with the long-term visibility they need. Our Roadmap shows there are huge opportunities for companies, investors, workers and entire economies on the path to net zero. Governments have the power to unlock these broad-based benefits.”



The gap between today’s investment trends and the needs of climate-driven scenarios is particularly large in emerging market and developing economies. This is emerging as a critical fault line in clean energy transitions in advance of the crucial COP26 meeting in Glasgow later this year, and will be the subject of a major new report from IEA on Financing Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging Market and Developing Economies, to be released on 9 June.
The United States has been announced as the next chair of the Biofuture Platform, a government-led, multi-stakeholder initiative designed to take action on climate change and support the Sustainable Development Goals by promoting international coordination on the sustainable low-carbon bioeconomy. The US will take over from incumbent chair, Brazil, in June 2021.

The Biofuture Platform was launched in November 2016 at the COP22 climate talks in Marrakesh, and the IEA has been the Facilitator of the Biofuture Platform since February 2019.
The International Energy Agency is inviting input from people around the world on ways government can make their clean energy policies more inclusive and equitable in order to maximise the benefits for the public. The contributions will help to inform the work of the Global Commission for People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions.

Take the survey here.

Established earlier this year and headed by Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen of Denmark, the Global Commission now has 29 members, including national leaders, ministers, top business executives and global thought leaders. They are examining how to enable citizens to benefit from the opportunities and navigate the disruptions inherent in the shift to a clean energy economy. The Commission will produce key recommendations in advance of COP26 in November.

As part of its activities, the Commission will host its first public webinar on 10 June at 14:00 CEST on the subject of Policies for People – Best practice in people centred policymaking. This livestreamed event will bring together Ministers from Canada, Senegal, Switzerland and Colombia, the European Commissioner for Energy, and six international experts. They will explore best practices in people-centred clean-energy transition policies.

The webinar will specifically discuss how clean energy transitions can provide higher levels of access for income generating activities and how to address specific gender and youth needs. It will also look at the pricing of clean energy transitions, and how gains and losses can be shared throughout society to better serve the common good.
US Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm has been elected by the IEA’s Governing Board to chair the Agency’s next Ministerial Meeting.

The Governing Board also elected three vice-chairs for the meeting: Angus Taylor, Australia’s Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction; Tinne Van der Straeten, Belgium’s Minister of Energy; and Dan Jørgensen, Denmark’s Minister of Climate, Energy and Utilities.

The meeting will be held in Paris in the first quarter of 2022. The IEA Ministerial meets every two years to set the Agency’s mandate and review its achievements. It will provide a key opportunity after COP26 in Glasgow for countries to advance how they can work together to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions and meet the goals of the Paris Agreement while ensuring secure energy supplies.
Spain has made considerable progress towards its goal of reaching net zero emissions by 2050, but future gains need to be supported by stable policies, adequate public financing and incentives for private investment, according to a new policy review by the International Energy Agency.



Since the IEA’s last in-depth review in 2015, Spain has solved a long-standing problem of electricity and gas tariffs not covering costs, and has closed all its coal mines, allowing the country to prioritise the issue of climate change and align its goals with EU objectives and ambitions.



Spain’s 2050 objective for national climate neutrality calls for renewables to provide 100% of electricity and 97% of the total energy mix. The country’s energy policies are centred on massive deployment of renewable energy, energy efficiency, electrification and renewable hydrogen.

While the share of renewables in the electricity sector has risen, the report finds Spain’s total energy mix is still heavily dominated by fossil fuels. Notably, the transport, industry and buildings sectors all have considerable work ahead of them to meet the country’s targets for renewables penetration and decarbonisation.

At the same time, Spain has emphasised the importance of ensuring a just transition to ensure that communities in traditional energy regions and sectors, notably coal mining, are not left behind by the changes.



“Under the direction of Minister Teresa Ribera, Spain has shown strong leadership on clean and equitable energy transitions,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director, who is launching the report today with Ms Ribera, Spain’s Fourth Vice President of the Spanish Government and Minister for the Ecological Transition and the Demographic Challenge. “Spain has major renewable energy resources that can drive the transformation of its energy system and help realise its ambitious goals.”

The IEA report notes that Spain is progressing toward its 2030 targets, especially in the electricity sector. After a slump between 2013 and 2018 due to a lack of financial incentives, investments in renewables took off again starting in 2019. The share of renewables in the national electricity mix grew from 33% in 2010 to 44% in 2020.

The government aims to expand renewables installations in homes and businesses, as well as promote the use of renewables for industry and heating. It also intends to support the production of advanced biofuels, renewable gases, and hydrogen.



Spain’s energy sector will look completely different once its plans and strategies have been fully implemented, with fossil fuels no longer dominant and end-user sectors mostly electrified. As is the case everywhere, a system underpinned by variable renewable generation will require new forms of back-up and flexibility to ensure energy security.



The changes also bring opportunities, particularly greater integration of a clean energy system across sectors, as well as new jobs.

“The foundations for Spain’s energy system transformation will be laid this decade. Notably, the current economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis presents Spain with an important opportunity to frontload clean energy investments over the next year three years,” said Dr Birol. “I hope this report will help Spain navigate its path toward a clean and efficient energy system and a net zero future.”
The world has a viable pathway to building a global energy sector with net-zero emissions in 2050, but it is narrow and requires an unprecedented transformation of how energy is produced, transported and used globally, the International Energy Agency said in a landmark special report released today.

Climate pledges by governments to date – even if fully achieved – would fall well short of what is required to bring global energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions to net zero by 2050 and give the world an even chance of limiting the global temperature rise to 1.5 °C, according to the new report, Net Zero by 2050: a Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector.

The report is the world’s first comprehensive study of how to transition to a net zero energy system by 2050 while ensuring stable and affordable energy supplies, providing universal energy access, and enabling robust economic growth. It sets out a cost-effective and economically productive pathway, resulting in a clean, dynamic and resilient energy economy dominated by renewables like solar and wind instead of fossil fuels. The report also examines key uncertainties, such as the roles of bioenergy, carbon capture and behavioural changes in reaching net zero.

“Our Roadmap shows the priority actions that are needed today to ensure the opportunity of net-zero emissions by 2050 – narrow but still achievable – is not lost. The scale and speed of the efforts demanded by this critical and formidable goal – our best chance of tackling climate change and limiting global warming to 1.5 °C – make this perhaps the greatest challenge humankind has ever faced,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “The IEA’s pathway to this brighter future brings a historic surge in clean energy investment that creates millions of new jobs and lifts global economic growth. Moving the world onto that pathway requires strong and credible policy actions from governments, underpinned by much greater international cooperation.”

Building on the IEA’s unrivalled energy modelling tools and expertise, the Roadmap sets out more than 400 milestones to guide the global journey to net zero by 2050. These include, from today, no investment in new fossil fuel supply projects, and no further final investment decisions for new unabated coal plants. By 2035, there are no sales of new internal combustion engine passenger cars, and by 2040, the global electricity sector has already reached net-zero emissions.

In the near term, the report describes a net zero pathway that requires the immediate and massive deployment of all available clean and efficient energy technologies, combined with a major global push to accelerate innovation. The pathway calls for annual additions of solar PV to reach 630 gigawatts by 2030, and those of wind power to reach 390 gigawatts. Together, this is four times the record level set in 2020. For solar PV, it is equivalent to installing the world’s current largest solar park roughly every day. A major worldwide push to increase energy efficiency is also an essential part of these efforts, resulting in the global rate of energy efficiency improvements averaging 4% a year through 2030 – about three times the average over the last two decades.

Most of the global reductions in CO2 emissions between now and 2030 in the net zero pathway come from technologies readily available today. But in 2050, almost half the reductions come from technologies that are currently only at the demonstration or prototype phase. This demands that governments quickly increase and reprioritise their spending on research and development – as well as on demonstrating and deploying clean energy technologies – putting them at the core of energy and climate policy. Progress in the areas of advanced batteries, electrolysers for hydrogen, and direct air capture and storage can be particularly impactful.

A transition of such scale and speed cannot be achieved without sustained support and participation from citizens, whose lives will be affected in multiple ways.

“The clean energy transition is for and about people,” said Dr Birol. “Our Roadmap shows that the enormous challenge of rapidly transitioning to a net zero energy system is also a huge opportunity for our economies. The transition must be fair and inclusive, leaving nobody behind. We have to ensure that developing economies receive the financing and technological know-how they need to build out their energy systems to meet the needs of their expanding populations and economies in a sustainable way.”

Providing electricity to around 785 million people who have no access to it and clean cooking solutions to 2.6 billion people who lack them is an integral part of the Roadmap’s net zero pathway. This costs around $40 billion a year, equal to around 1% of average annual energy sector investment. It also brings major health benefits through reductions in indoor air pollution, cutting the number of premature deaths by 2.5 million a year.

Total annual energy investment surges to USD 5 trillion by 2030 in the net zero pathway, adding an extra 0.4 percentage points a year to global GDP growth, based on a joint analysis with the International Monetary Fund. The jump in private and government spending creates millions of jobs in clean energy, including energy efficiency, as well as in the engineering, manufacturing and construction industries. All of this puts global GDP 4% higher in 2030 than it would reach based on current trends.

By 2050, the energy world looks completely different. Global energy demand is around 8% smaller than today, but it serves an economy more than twice as big and a population with 2 billion more people. Almost 90% of electricity generation comes from renewable sources, with wind and solar PV together accounting for almost 70%. Most of the remainder comes from nuclear power. Solar is the world’s single largest source of total energy supply. Fossil fuels fall from almost four-fifths of total energy supply today to slightly over one-fifth. Fossil fuels that remain are used in goods where the carbon is embodied in the product such as plastics, in facilities fitted with carbon capture, and in sectors where low-emissions technology options are scarce.

“The pathway laid out in our Roadmap is global in scope, but each country will need to design its own strategy, taking into account its own specific circumstances,” said Dr Birol. “Plans need to reflect countries’ differing stages of economic development: in our pathway, advanced economies reach net zero before developing economies. The IEA stands ready to support governments in preparing their own national and regional roadmaps, to provide guidance and assistance in implementing them, and to promote international cooperation on accelerating the energy transition worldwide.”

The special report is designed to inform the high-level negotiations that will take place at the 26th Conference of the Parties (COP26) of the United Nations Climate Change Framework Convention in Glasgow in November. It was requested as input to the negotiations by the UK government’s COP26 Presidency.

“I welcome this report, which sets out a clear roadmap to net-zero emissions and shares many of the priorities we have set as the incoming COP Presidency – that we must act now to scale up clean technologies in all sectors and phase out both coal power and polluting vehicles in the coming decade,” said COP26 President-Designate Alok Sharma. “I am encouraged that it underlines the great value of international collaboration, without which the transition to global net zero could be delayed by decades. Our first goal for the UK as COP26 Presidency is to put the world on a path to driving down emissions, until they reach net zero by the middle of this century.”

New energy security challenges will emerge on the way to net zero by 2050 while longstanding ones will remain, even as the role of oil and gas diminishes. The contraction of oil and natural gas production will have far-reaching implications for all the countries and companies that produce these fuels. No new oil and natural gas fields are needed in the net zero pathway, and supplies become increasingly concentrated in a small number of low-cost producers. OPEC’s share of a much-reduced global oil supply grows from around 37% in recent years to 52% in 2050, a level higher than at any point in the history of oil markets.

Growing energy security challenges that result from the increasing importance of electricity include the variability of supply from some renewables and cybersecurity risks. In addition, the rising dependence on critical minerals required for key clean energy technologies and infrastructure brings risks of price volatility and supply disruptions that could hinder the transition.

“Since the IEA’s founding in 1974, one of its core missions has been to promote secure and affordable energy supplies to foster economic growth. This has remained a key concern of our Net Zero Roadmap,” Dr Birol said. “Governments need to create markets for investments in batteries, digital solutions and electricity grids that reward flexibility and enable adequate and reliable supplies of electricity. The rapidly growing role of critical minerals calls for new international mechanisms to ensure both the timely availability of supplies and sustainable production.”

The full report is available for free on the IEA’s website along with an online interactive that highlights some of the key milestones in the pathway that must be achieved in the next three decades to reach net-zero emissions by 2050.
Renewable sources of electricity such as wind and solar grew at their fastest rate in two decades in 2020 and are set to expand in coming years at a much faster pace than prior to the pandemic, according to a new report by the International Energy Agency. The growth in Europe and the United States will be even brisker than previously forecast, compensating for China’s transitional slowdown after exceptional 2020 growth.



According to the IEA’s latest market update, the amount of renewable electricity capacity added in 2020 rose by 45% in 2020 to 280 gigawatts (GW), the largest year-on-year increase since 1999. That extra power is equal to the total installed capacity of ASEAN, a grouping of 10 dynamic South-East Asian economies.



The increase in 2020 is set to become the “new normal”, with about 270 GW of renewable capacity on course to be added in 2021 and almost 280 GW in 2022, despite a slowdown in China after an exceptional level of additions last year. Those forecasts have been revised upwards by more than 25% from the IEA’s previous estimates in November as governments around the world have auctioned record levels of renewable capacity and companies have signed record-level power purchase agreements, even as the pandemic spread macroeconomic uncertainties and supressed demand.



Shifting power generation to renewable sources is a key pillar of global efforts to reach carbon neutrality, but CO2 emissions are set to rise this year because of a parallel rise in coal use, underscoring the major policy changes and investments in clean energy needed to meet climate goals.



“Wind and solar power are giving us more reasons to be optimistic about our climate goals as they break record after record. Last year, the increase in renewable capacity accounted for 90% of the entire global power sector’s expansion,” said Fatih Birol, the Executive Director of the IEA. “Governments need to build on this promising momentum through policies that encourage greater investment in solar and wind, in the additional grid infrastructure they will require, and in other key renewable technologies such as hydropower, bioenergy and geothermal. A massive expansion of clean electricity is essential to giving the world a chance of achieving its net zero goals.’’



Global wind capacity additions almost doubled last year to 114 GW. That growth will slow down a bit in 2021 and 2022, but the increases will still be 50% larger than the average expansion during the 2017-19 period. Solar PV installations will continue to break new records, with annual additions forecast to reach over 160 GW by 2022. That would be almost 50% higher than the level achieved in 2019 prior to the pandemic, affirming solar’s position as the “new king” of global electricity markets.



China is at the center of global renewable demand and supply, accounting for around 40% of global renewable capacity growth for several years. In 2020, China’s share rose to 50% for the first time due to a rush to complete projects before government subsidies were phased out. In 2021-22 renewables growth in China is set to stabilise at levels that are below the 2020 record but still over 50% above where it was during the 2017-19 period. Any slowdown in China in the coming years will be compensated for by strong growth in Europe, the United States, India and Latin America where government support and falling prices for solar PV and wind continue to drive installations.

China is the largest manufacturer of solar panels and wind turbines, as well as the biggest supplier of raw materials such as silicon, glass, steel, copper and rare earth materials needed to build them. Supply chain constraints, including due to a fire in a Chinese silicon factory last year, have recently pushed up prices of PV modules, highlighting the sector’s potential vulnerabilities in the longer term.



In the United States, renewable capacity growth this year and next is mainly spurred by the extension of federal tax credits. The forecast does not take into account the US administration’s new emissions reduction targets or its infrastructure bill. If enacted, the bill would drive a much stronger acceleration in the deployment of renewables after 2022.



India’s capacity additions declined by almost 50% last year compared with 2019. However, growth is set to rebound and renewable expansion is expected to set a new records by 2022, driven by the commissioning of delayed projects. However, the current surge in Covid‑19 cases in India has created short-term uncertainty for this year.

Transport biofuel production declined 8% globally in 2020 as the pandemic limited travel. Production is expected to recover this year to 2019 volumes, and expand another 7% in 2022 as biodiesel and hydrotreated vegetable oil (HVO) production increases globally and ethanol expands in India.

However, the ongoing effects of the Covid-19 crisis on demand, as well as price competition for sugar cane from sweetener manufacturers in Brazil, continue to keep ethanol production in both the United States and Brazil below 2019 levels. At the same time, global HVO production capacity is expected to nearly double in the next two years, significantly expanding the capability of producing biofuels from waste and residue feedstocks.
Supplies of critical minerals essential for key clean energy technologies like electric vehicles and wind turbines need to pick up sharply over the coming decades to meet the world’s climate goals, creating potential energy security hazards that governments must act now to address, according to a new report by the International Energy Agency.

The special report, The Role of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions, is the most comprehensive global study to date on the central importance of minerals such as copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt and rare earth elements in a secure and rapid transformation of the global energy sector. Building on the IEA’s longstanding leadership role in energy security, the report recommends six key areas of action for policy makers to ensure that critical minerals enable an accelerated transition to clean energy rather than becoming a bottleneck.

“Today, the data shows a looming mismatch between the world’s strengthened climate ambitions and the availability of critical minerals that are essential to realising those ambitions,” said Fatih Birol, Executive Director of the IEA. “The challenges are not insurmountable, but governments must give clear signals about how they plan to turn their climate pledges into action. By acting now and acting together, they can significantly reduce the risks of price volatility and supply disruptions.”

“Left unaddressed, these potential vulnerabilities could make global progress towards a clean energy future slower and more costly – and therefore hamper international efforts to tackle climate change,” Dr Birol said. “This is what energy security looks like in the 21st century, and the IEA is fully committed to helping governments ensure that these hazards don’t derail the global drive to accelerate energy transitions.”

The special report, part of the IEA’s flagship World Energy Outlook series, underscores that the mineral requirements of an energy system powered by clean energy technologies differ profoundly from one that runs on fossil fuels. A typical electric car requires six times the mineral inputs of a conventional car, and an onshore wind plant requires nine times more mineral resources than a similarly sized gas-fired power plant.

Demand outlooks and supply vulnerabilities vary widely by mineral, but the energy sector’s overall needs for critical minerals could increase by as much as six times by 2040, depending on how rapidly governments act to reduce emissions. Not only is this a massive increase in absolute terms, but as the costs of technologies fall, mineral inputs will account for an increasingly important part of the value of key components, making their overall costs more vulnerable to potential mineral price swings.

The commercial importance of these minerals also grow rapidly: today’s revenue from coal production is ten times larger than from energy transition minerals. However, in climate-driven scenarios, these positions are reversed well before 2040.

To produce the report, the IEA built on its detailed, technology-rich energy modelling tools to establish a unique database showing future mineral requirements under varying scenarios that span a range of levels of climate action and 11 different technology evolution pathways. In climate-driven scenarios, mineral demand for use in batteries for electric vehicles and grid storage is a major force, growing at least thirty times to 2040. The rise of low-carbon power generation to meet climate goals also means a tripling of mineral demand from this sector by 2040. Wind takes the lead, bolstered by material-intensive offshore wind. Solar PV follows closely, due to the sheer volume of capacity that is added. The expansion of electricity networks also requires a huge amount of copper and aluminium.

Unlike oil – a commodity produced around the world and traded in liquid markets – production and processing of many minerals such as lithium, cobalt and some rare earth elements are highly concentrated in a handful of countries, with the top three producers accounting for more than 75% of supplies. Complex and sometimes opaque supply chains also increase the risks that could arise from physical disruptions, trade restrictions or other developments in major producing countries. In addition, while there is no shortage of resources, the quality of available deposits is declining as the most immediately accessible resources are exploited. Producers also face the necessity of stricter environmental and social standards.

The IEA report provides six key recommendations for policy makers to foster stable supplies of critical minerals to support accelerated clean energy transitions. These include the need for governments to lay out their long-term commitments for emission reductions, which would provide the confidence needed for suppliers to invest in and expand mineral production. Governments should also promote technological advances, scale up recycling to relieve pressure on primary supplies, maintain high environmental and social standards, and strengthen international collaboration between producers and consumers.
North-West Europe has a well-developed hydrogen industry that could be at the edge of an unprecedented transformation should governments keep raising their ambitions for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, according to a new joint report by the International Energy Agency (IEA) and the Clingendael International Energy Programme (CIEP).

The report, Hydrogen in North-Western Europe: A vision towards 2030, explores hydrogen developments, policies and potential for collaboration in the region. It was commissioned to inform discussions among governments from North-West Europe about the potential development of a regional hydrogen market. This intergovernmental dialogue was established at the Clean Energy Ministerial Hydrogen Initiative in 2020.

The report finds that the current policy landscape provides some momentum for the transformation of the hydrogen industry in North-West Europe towards 2030, but that it is insufficient to fully tap into the region’s potential to develop a large-scale low-carbon hydrogen value chain. More ambitious policies in line with the targets defined by the EU Green Deal or the UK Climate Change Act would drive a faster transformation.

If such a supportive policy framework were to be adopted, hydrogen demand in the region could grow by a third and low-carbon hydrogen could meet more than half of dedicated production, up from about 10% today, according to the report.

North-West European countries have already made significant progress developing their vision for the role hydrogen should play in their long-term energy strategies. These countries now face the challenge of moving beyond national discussions to establish a regional dialogue, an indispensable condition to develop the fully integrated hydrogen market the region needs.

With the aim of informing this dialogue, the report identifies four priorities that should be addressed:
The global auto industry suffered a punishing year in 2020 because of the major shock of Covid-19, but the electric car market bucked the wider trend with growth of over 40% and is on track for a decade of strong expansion, according to a new report published today by the International Energy Agency.

The IEA’s Global Electric Vehicle Outlook 2021 finds that despite the pandemic setting off a cascade of economic recessions, a record 3 million new electric cars were registered in 2020, a 41% increase from the previous year. By comparison, the global automobile market contracted 16% in 2020. Electric cars’ strong momentum has continued into this year, with sales in the first quarter of 2021 reaching nearly two and half times their level in the same period a year earlier.

Last year’s increase brought the number of electric cars on the world’s roads to more than 10 million, with another roughly 1 million electric vans, heavy trucks and buses. For the first time last year, Europe overtook China as the centre of the global electric car market. Electric car registrations in Europe more than doubled to 1.4 million, while in China they increased 9% to 1.2 million.

“While they can't do the job alone, electric vehicles have an indispensable role to play in reaching net-zero emissions worldwide,'' said Fatih Birol, Executive Director of the IEA. “Current sales trends are very encouraging, but our shared climate and energy goals call for even faster market uptake. Governments should now be doing the essential groundwork to accelerate the adoption of electric vehicles by using economic recovery packages to invest in battery manufacturing and the development of widespread and reliable charging infrastructure.''

Electric vehicles are set for significant growth over the coming decade, the new IEA report finds. Based on current trends and policies, it projects the number of electric cars, vans, heavy trucks and buses on the road worldwide to reach 145 million by 2030. But the global fleet could reach 230 million if governments accelerate efforts to reach international climate and energy goals, as outlined in the IEA’s Sustainable Development Scenario.

And if governments around the world pull together to pursue the even more ambitious goal of reaching net-zero emissions globally by 2050, the global electric vehicle fleet would grow even bigger. More details on the implications of this pathway for electric vehicles and the broader transport sector will appear in the IEA’s special report, Net Zero in 2050: A roadmap for the global energy system, which will be released on 18 May.

Consumer spending on electric cars increased another 50% last year to reach USD 120 billion. At the same time, government support measures stood at USD 14 billion, the fifth year in a row in which they have fallen as a share of total spending. Even if government subsidies remain important for spurring the uptake of electric vehicles, this suggests sales are increasingly being driven more by consumer choice.

Automakers offered 370 electric car models in 2020, a 40% year-on-year increase. Eighteen of the 20 largest automakers have announced intentions to further increase the number of available models and boost production of electric light-duty vehicles. These automakers account for 90% of all global auto sales.

The Global Electric Vehicle Outlook 2021 notes that governments helped buffer electric cars from 2020’s downturn by extending existing policy and fiscal support, and augment them with stimulus measures in response to the Covid-19 crisis. Leading countries also promoted the competitive position of electric vehicles by strengthening fuel economy and emissions standards, and redoubled their support for developing battery technology and deploying charging station infrastructure.

The report emphasises that the shift of the road transport sector towards electric vehicles extends well beyond cars. The most electrified road transport mode today is two- and three-wheeled vehicles – such as motorcycles and mopeds – with more than 25 million units sold, the bulk of them in Asia. Urban buses have also electrified rapidly. And heavy trucks are a segment where electric models and sales have only recently begun to grow strongly, as battery performance have improved and driving ranges have lengthened.

Electric vehicles have a key role to play in tackling emissions. On a “well-to-wheel” basis, their net contribution to reducing emissions, already evident today, will grow in tandem with the pace at which electricity generation decarbonises. This highlights the need for policy makers to think about global clean energy transitions holistically across sectors to ensure that progress in one area is not being undermined by shortcomings in another.
The Seven Key Principles for Implementing Net Zero were presented by the International Energy Agency at the IEA-COP26 Net Zero Summit, held on 31 March 2021, and were adopted by many IEA Member Countries to guide the implementation of net zero commitments.

***

Meeting our shared goals for avoiding dangerous climate change requires a dramatic acceleration of progress towards clean growth and resilience. Over 120 countries have so far announced their intention to bring emissions to net zero by the middle of this century. As we look forward to COP26, this growing political consensus is a cause for optimism about the world’s ability to reach the goals of the Paris Agreement. A tremendous amount of work is now needed to turn ambitions into reality.

With that in mind, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States welcome the following Seven Key Principles for Implementing Net Zero, and we encourage the IEA Secretariat and Members to examine how the IEA, building on its key strengths, can best support the delivery of these principles, in close partnership with other relevant institutions:

Sustainable recoveries can provide a once-in-a-generation down payment toward net zero: As countries stimulate economies and build back after the Covid-19 pandemic, they also have an historic opportunity to jumpstart progress toward achieving net zero emissions. The IEA can further support governments to harness the transition to sustainable net zero energy systems as a driver of clean, sustainable growth and job creation. Clear, ambitious and implementable net-zero-aligned roadmaps to 2030 and beyond are critical: Governments can increase international confidence in the transition by setting out national roadmaps for action over the next vital 10 years, which incorporate each country’s diverse circumstances and utilise a variety of low-carbon technologies and options to enhance steady implementation. The IEA can further support governments across the IEA family in the development of net-zero-aligned roadmaps to 2030 and beyond, and provide necessary guidance and assistance to facilitate implementation. Transitions will go faster when learning is shared: A wide range of real-world implementation challenges are holding back transitions, including meeting the energy needs of underserved populations and improving safe and sustainable energy access for the poorest and most vulnerable groups. The IEA’s Clean Energy Transitions Programme is supporting governments across the IEA family to navigate the technical and economic transition risks and chart an actionable course towards a sustainable and inclusive energy system. Further enhancing mechanisms to share best practices, collaborate on technology, and provide targeted advice across the IEA family can help drive the pace of transition across the global energy system. Net zero sectors and innovation are essential to achieve global net zero: Today’s early stage technologies will likely need to contribute almost half of the emissions reductions required to set the world on an ambitious path to net zero. The development and deployment at scale of a range of climate-neutral energy technologies, combined with energy efficiency, can enable rapid, sustainable and deep energy transitions across all major energy use sectors – many of which involve complex value chains that cross national boundaries. Stronger, consolidated public-private mechanisms for international coordination are needed to accelerate innovation and deployment within sectors. The IEA can further enhance and improve its analysis of innovation and sector decarbonisation, and promote joint strategies and approaches across the IEA family, including coordination with other relevant international fora. Mobilising, tracking and benchmarking public and private investment can be the fuel to achieve net zero: There is an urgent need to shift gears on climate-neutral energy investment to put the world on track for net zero. By 2030, the amount of investment required in electricity (generation and grid/storage) needs to rise to more than $1.6 trillion per year to be on track for net zero emissions by 2050. Major international efforts are required to increase capital flows for climate neutral energy in emerging markets and developing economies. Public and private sector actors need to be brought together to create the necessary enabling environments to further catalyse sustainable and socially acceptable energy investment. The IEA can enhance its provision of analysis and practical guidance to both governments and the finance community, including through partnerships with other relevant organisations. People-centred transitions are morally required and politically necessary: As countries seek to advance their shifts to clean energy technologies, the success of these efforts will rest on enabling citizens to benefit from transition opportunities and to navigate disruptions. This includes social, environmental and economic impacts on individuals and communities, as well as issues of affordability and fairness. A focus on training and skills development to equip all citizens to participate in the net zero economy is also critical. Governments should continue to share best practices and, where useful, explore and step up new ways of sharing best practices for designing climate-neutral energy policies that are people-centred and inclusive, including as part of the IEA’s Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions. Net zero energy systems also need to be sustainable, secure, affordable and resilient: Maintaining energy security through transitions is critical. Governments, companies and other key actors need to both anticipate and manage existing and new energy security challenges, including ensuring uninterrupted flow of energy, even as variable power sources increase. This will require ensuring a diverse, sustainable and socially acceptable clean energy and technology mix; making best use of existing infrastructure; and addressing emerging challenges such as climate resilience, cyber risks and the availability and security of critical minerals. Governments should work together to analyse where new mechanisms can contribute to further strengthening the security and resilience of the global energy system alongside a swift net zero transition, which can be underpinned by the IEA’s provision of analytic expertise, best practice and efficient security mechanisms.

Being united by the high level of their ambitions, countries at all stages of development will need to determine their own unique path to implementing net zero according to the diversity of national circumstances and wide range of technologies.
Lithuania has made impressive headway in its clean energy transition in recent years but needs to take action in several key areas to accelerate progress towards its goal of climate neutrality in 2050, according to a new policy review by the International Energy Agency.

Lithuania is seeking membership of the IEA, which conducted the in-depth review of the country’s energy policies as part of the accession process. The review found that Lithuania has strengthened its energy policies over recent years. Electricity market reforms are underway and Lithuania – along with its Baltic neighbours Latvia and Estonia – is integrating its power system into Continental Europe’s.

Lithuania’s track record on its clean energy transition is impressive. The carbon intensity of electricity and heat generation has decreased over the past decade, and Lithuania is now comparable with leading IEA countries when it comes to the share of renewables in final energy consumption. The Ignalina nuclear power plant was shut down at the very end of 2009, forcing the country to boost electricity imports, but domestic clean power generation is rising fast. Biomass provides 80% of district heat, onshore wind is growing, and the country’s unique net metering system is driving fast growth in clean distributed energy.

Despite the decoupling of emissions from economic growth, Lithuania’s total energy-related CO2 emissions have increased 9% since 2000, notably from transport, which accounts for the lion’s share of the country’s emissions. To meet its targets, Lithuania needs to reverse that trend, but even stronger efforts will be needed for it to contribute to global efforts to reach climate neutrality. According to the IEA review, these should start with tighter integration of energy and climate decision making and with the engagement of society at large to implement the government’s plans. Progress must be monitored and targets continuously updated, in line with Lithuania’s commitment to climate neutrality and EU emissions reductions targets.

“Lithuania needs to boost investments in clean energy technologies to enhance both its energy security and the competitiveness of its industries,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director, who is launching the report today with Lithuania’s Minister of Energy Dainius Kreivys. “Hydrogen, offshore wind and batteries can be real game-changers in the context of Lithuania’s clean energy transition. I welcome the efforts by the Ministry of Energy to facilitate these innovations and look forward to the country joining the IEA as a full member.”

Energy efficiency progress has slowed down in Lithuania, as in many IEA countries. Energy consumption is rising in contrast with the government’s aim of reducing it by 60% by 2050. The IEA review finds that energy efficiency must be made a top priority. More stringent energy performance standards and energy taxation reform can slow the increase in energy consumption and reduce emissions. The recently adopted long-term renovation strategy is a welcome step forwards, as is the promotion of e-mobility, electrification, biofuels and related infrastructure under the new Alternative Fuels Law.

Lithuania targets 100% of electricity from renewables by 2050, which will require electricity systems and markets to accommodate very high shares of variable renewable energy, notably onshore and offshore wind. In the policy review, the IEA urges the government to adopt a forward-looking renewable energy strategy with a focus on flexibility and sustainability in order to help attract investment. It also needs to define the opportunities that Lithuania’s vast forest resources provide as a carbon sink and as a driver of the region’s bio-economy and biomass trade.

As the Lithuanian economy recovers from the 2020 economic crisis, a rebound in emissions is anticipated, notably in buildings, industry and transport. Policies for these sectors will play a critical role in scaling up private and public investments and allowing the private sector to eventually take over. The IEA recommends an auctioning system for clean energy technologies such as renewables, hydrogen, and energy storage.

Lithuania has consistently emphasised energy security in its energy strategy and regional engagement. Lithuania’s future accession to the IEA can further strengthen the country’s energy security, including for oil, gas and electricity. A Baltic gas market is emerging, connecting infrastructures and countries in the region. The IEA review encourages Lithuania to swiftly complete the gas interconnection to Poland to join the wider regional gas market.

In 2010, Lithuania became a net importer of electricity. By 2030, the government aims to reverse import dependency and produce 70% of its electricity needs domestically. Regional supply security has become a top priority, as the Baltic states ceased electricity imports from Belarus in 2020 and are targeting the full synchronization of their power systems with that of Continental Europe by 2025. The IEA review offers insights into how to strengthen electricity security as the system becomes more exposed to extreme weather events and cyber security threats.
Ms Warlick retired from the US Department of State in September 2017 after a 34-year career during which she served most recently as Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary and Acting Special Envoy and Coordinator for International Energy Affairs. Previously, she was Ambassador to Serbia under President Barack Obama, Consul General in Melbourne, Australia, and Counselor for Economic Affairs in Moscow.



In her last assignment, she served for three years as the US representative on the IEA Governing Board and as Chair of the IEA’s Standing Group on Long-Term Cooperation. Since leaving government service, she has also served as team leader for the IEA’s recent in-depth peer reviews of the energy policies in the Netherlands and Canada.

During her government career, Ms Warlick has held a variety of other senior leadership positions in Washington and overseas at the Department of State, the National Security Council and the Department of Defense.

She also has extensive foreign policy experience working on Russia, Ukraine and Eurasia, having served as Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Russia; Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Russia, Ukraine and Eurasia; and Director of the State Department’s Office of Russian Affairs and the Office of Ukraine, Moldova and Belarus Affairs.

“We are very excited to welcome Mary to the IEA,” said Fatih Birol, Executive Director of the IEA. “She brings with her a wealth of experience in energy, foreign policy and international affairs, and a deep commitment to facilitating a global transition to sustainable energy and expanding international collaboration.”

Ms Warlick holds a BA in Political Science and Humanities from Valparaiso University in Indiana, and an MA in Law and Diplomacy from the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy.

She succeeds David Turk, who recently took up duties as Deputy Secretary of the US Department of Energy. Keisuke Sadamori, IEA Director of Energy Markets and Security, will continue serving as acting Deputy Executive Director until Ms. Warlick starts in her new post.
The number of high-value patents worldwide for inventions related to low-carbon energy technologies recovered at the end of the last decade but still remains well below its rate of growth from 10 years earlier, according to a new joint study published today by the International Energy Agency (IEA) and the European Patent Office (EPO).

The report, Patents and the energy transition: global trends in clean energy technology innovation, finds that patents related to low-carbon energy technologies grew on average by 3.3% a year in the 2017-19 period, underscoring that much faster innovation progress will be essential to successfully accelerate the transition to clean energy.

Apart from a slump between 2014 and 2016, the number of global patents in low-carbon energy technologies has been rising over the past two decades, particularly in those related to electric transportation, according to the joint report. By contrast, patenting in fossil fuels has been declining since 2015.

Recent IEA analysis shows that current climate targets can only be achieved by a major acceleration in clean energy innovation, as many of the technologies required in the coming decades to bring down CO2 emissions are only at the prototype or demonstration phase today.

“Around half the emissions reductions to get to net zero by 2050 may need to come from technologies that are not yet on the market,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “This calls for massive leaps in innovation, but up until now information on the progress being made has been limited. By combining the complementary strengths of the IEA and the EPO, this report gives us a stronger foundation for identifying and tracking strengths and weaknesses in low-carbon energy patenting, providing a much better picture of the state of the energy transition.’’

"The energy transition needed to mitigate climate change presents a challenge of enormous scale and complexity," said EPO President António Campinos. "This report is a clear call for action to step up research and innovation into new low-carbon energy technologies, and improve existing ones. While it reveals some encouraging trends across countries and industry sectors, including in key cross-cutting technologies, it also highlights the need to further accelerate innovation in clean energy technologies, some of which are still only emerging."

The report presents the major trends in low-carbon energy innovation between 2000 and 2019 measured in terms of international patent families (IPFs), each of which represents a high-value invention for which patent applications have been filed at two or more patent offices worldwide. As patent applications are filed many months, or even years, before products appear on the market, they are often seen as an early indicator of future technology trends.

Since 2000, businesses around the globe have filed more than 420 000 patents in the area of low-carbon energy. Inventions in low-carbon energy supply technologies such as electricity generation from renewable sources has been falling since 2012, reflecting the maturity of some of these technologies. End-use applications such as transport, buildings or industrial production have remained relatively stable in recent years, and accounted for the majority (60%) of all low-carbon energy inventions over the past five years. By contrast, “enabling” technologies such as batteries, hydrogen, smart grids and carbon capture have experienced the strongest growth since 2017.



The study finds that European companies and research institutes have led in patenting low-carbon energy inventions, with 28% of all international patents in the past decade (2010-19), followed by Japanese (25%), US (20%), South Korean (10%) and Chinese (8%) applicants. However, Japan leads in electric vehicle technology and batteries, and the United States has an edge in aviation, biofuels and carbon capture.
The following is a transcript of the remarks that IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol delivered at the Leaders Summit on Climate, convened by US President Joe Biden, on 22-23 April 2021.

Distinguished guests,

I would like to commend President Biden for convening this Summit within 100 days of taking office. And I welcome the commitments to reduce emissions announced by so many countries.

It is clear that the level of commitment to fight climate change has never been higher. This is excellent news.

But I will be blunt: commitments alone are not enough. We need real change in the real world.

Right now, the data does not match the rhetoric – and the gap is getting wider.

Our latest estimates for CO2 emissions in 2021 are a warning for humanity. Emissions are on track for their second-largest increase in history.

We are not recovering from Covid in a sustainable way, and we remain on a path of dangerous levels of global warming.

Yet there are grounds for optimism.

Electricity generated from renewables will break records this year. And sales of electric cars will reach another record high.

But getting to net-zero emissions requires much more than that -- we will need to transform our entire energy system.

This means drastically cutting emissions from trucks, ships and planes.

We will also need to do the same for steel and cement factories, chemical plants and in farming.

We have many technologies at our disposal today – energy efficiency, solar, wind, electric cars, nuclear power, and many more – and we need to deploy these as quickly as possible.

However, IEA analysis shows that about half the reductions to get to net zero emissions in 2050 will need to come from technologies that are not yet ready for market.

This calls for massive leaps in innovation. Innovation across batteries, hydrogen, synthetic fuels, carbon capture and many other technologies.

On 18 May, the International Energy Agency will release a roadmap for how the global energy sector can reach net zero by 2050.

Make no mistake – this is a herculean task.

Participants to this Summit have used the occasion to make new announcements.

Let me add one from the IEA.

According to our upcoming Roadmap, reaching net-zero will triple clean energy investment opportunities over the next decade.

This will generate millions of well-paid jobs and create the industries of the future.

But, our priority is to make sure these benefits reach as many people as possible.

We need to work together to achieve our goals and create a better future for all of us.
Global energy-related carbon dioxide emissions are on course to surge by 1.5 billion tonnes in 2021 – the second-largest increase in history – reversing most of last year’s decline caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, a new IEA report released today shows. This would be the biggest annual rise in emissions since 2010, during the carbon-intensive recovery from the global financial crisis.

The IEA’s Global Energy Review 2021 estimates that CO2 emissions will increase by almost 5% this year to 33 billion tonnes, based on the latest national data from around the world as well as real-time analysis of economic growth trends and new energy projects that are set to come online. The key driver is coal demand, which is set to grow by 4.5%, surpassing its 2019 level and approaching its all-time peak from 2014, with the electricity sector accounting for three-quarters of this increase.

“Global carbon emissions are set to jump by 1.5 billion tonnes this year – driven by in the resurgence of coal use in the power sector. This is a dire warning that the economic recovery from the Covid crisis is currently anything but sustainable for our climate,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “Unless governments around the world move rapidly to start cutting emissions, we are likely to face an even worse situation in 2022. The Leaders Summit on Climate hosted by US President Joe Biden this week is a critical moment to commit to clear and immediate action ahead of COP26 in Glasgow.”

Global energy demand is set to increase by 4.6% in 2021 – led by emerging markets and developing economies – pushing it above its 2019 level. Demand for all fossil fuels is on course to grow significantly in 2021, with both coal and gas set to rise above their 2019 levels. Oil is also rebounding strongly but is expected to stay below its 2019 peak, as the aviation sector remains under pressure.

The expected rise in coal use dwarfs that of renewables by almost 60%, despite accelerating demand for renewables. More than 80% of the projected growth in coal demand in 2021 is set to come from Asia, led by China. Coal use in the United States and the European Union is also on course to increase but will remain well below pre-crisis levels.

Electricity generation from renewables is set to leap by over 8% in 2021, accounting for more than half of the increase in overall electricity supply worldwide. The biggest contribution to that growth comes from solar and wind, which are on track for their largest annual rise in history. Electricity generation from wind is projected to grow by 275 terawatt-hours, or around 17%, from last year. Electricity generation from solar PV is expected to increase by 145 terawatt-hours, up almost 18% from last year. Their combined output is on track to reach more than 2 800 terawatt-hours in 2021.

Renewables are set to provide 30% of electricity generation worldwide in 2021, their biggest share of the power mix since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution and up from less than 27% in 2019. China is expected to account for almost half of the global increase in electricity generation from renewables, followed by the United States, the European Union and India.

The Global Energy Review is the IEA’s annual update on the latest trends in world energy and CO2 emissions. It covers all the main fuels and technologies, providing insights across regions, economies and countries.
The IEA is carrying out a large work programme on power system enhancement with the Government of Indonesia to help it modernise the country’s electricity sector, including support for overcoming challenges inherent in integrating variable renewables like wind and solar PV.

As part of the work programme, the IEA hosted a series of webinars in early 2021 where Indonesia’s Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources and national power utility PLN could learn from other countries’ experiences of integrating and setting targets for variable renewable energy.

An introductory session on the principles of integrating renewable energy was held ahead of the country specific sessions. In this session, the IEA presented its framework for renewable integration phases to the Ministry and PLN, highlighting the different challenges often faced during renewable integration as well as what flexibility options can be deployed to tackle these challenges.

In the first country session, IEA presented the main findings of the Thailand flexibility study that the Agency carried out in cooperation with EGAT, the Thai electricity utility. The study shows that Thailand has the technical capability to integrate larger shares of variable renewables, but that the lack of commercial flexibility is a major barrier for operating the power system in a more flexible way and thus is the main obstacle for integrating large amounts of renewables.

In the second country session, the Danish Energy Agency presented its work programme with the Government of Viet Nam. The sessions focused on important aspects for integration of renewables, such as the assessing the needs and implications of reserves and forecasting. The session also included a discussion on the main learning points from the boom in rooftop solar that Viet Nam has experienced in 2020.

The third and last country session was on India. The IEA presented both national as well as state-level modelling in order to show some of the contextual differences between national models and models that focus on specific geographical regions. In India, the spot market accounts for only 10% of electricity generation, which shows that India, like Thailand, has some issues with commercial flexibility. The discussion also covered India’s level of dependency on physical power purchase agreements and its impacts on the flexibility of the power system.

All sessions were held behind closed doors to allow for an open discussion between the participating organisations on the issues of renewable integration and possible ways of addressing barriers. The IEA will continue the work with the Indonesian Ministry and PLN on this topic in order to facilitate a path towards a clean, affordable, secure and modern power sector in Indonesia.

This work in Indonesia is undertaken within the Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging Economies programme.
Top international energy and climate leaders from more than 40 countries took part in the IEA-COP26 Net Zero Summit today to identify how to work together to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions and meet the goals of the Paris Agreement.

The Net Zero Summit, co-hosted by IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol and COP26 President Alok Sharma, brought together high-level representatives of energy and climate ministries from countries including Australia, Brazil, China, Colombia, the European Union, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, South Africa, the United Kingdom and many others. Participants from a broad cross-section of civil society groups, private companies and government institutions also took part in the discussions.

The Summit is a critical milestone on the road to COP26 in Glasgow in November. It brought together representatives of countries covering more than 80% of global GDP, population and emissions. Key participants included Zhang Jianhua, China’s Minister of Energy; Frans Timmermans, Executive Vice-President of the European Commission; Raj Kumar Singh, India’s Minister of Power, New and Renewable Energy; and John Kerry, US Presidential Special Envoy for Climate; Amani Abou-Zeid, African Union Commissioner for Infrastructure and Energy; and Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, Director-General of the World Trade Organisation.

“It is time for the world to move from a decade of climate change deliberation to a decade of delivery. The UK strongly encourages countries to endorse the IEA’s seven principles for achieving net zero. Today's Summit clearly showed willingness from governments, civil society and businesses to work together in each emitting sector to make this happen and keep the 1.5 degree target within reach,” said Alok Sharma, the COP26 President. "This should not be viewed as a shouldering of a burden, but more a sharing of an opportunity. By working together, we can accelerate progress, create jobs and prosperity, and protect our planet for future generations.”

“Our Net Zero Summit made clear that the vast majority of the world agrees on the gravity of the climate crisis and the urgency of immediate actions to put global emissions on track towards net zero. But it also underscored the need for greater international collaboration to drive the rapid global deployment of clean technologies across all the key sectors of the economy,” said Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “No country can do this alone. If we want the transition to clean energy to happen quickly, the world’s major economies have to work much more effectively and closely together. The Summit’s Key Principles show what needs to happen, and I offer the IEA’s full support for the UK COP26 Presidency’s efforts to strengthen the international cooperation mechanisms that will accelerate our transition to net zero.”

Many IEA member governments supported the Seven Key Principles presented by the IEA at the Summit to guide the implementation of net zero commitments. The principles cover essential areas such as the need for sustainable recoveries from the Covid-19 crisis, the critical importance of implementable emissions reduction roadmaps for the current decade, and the development of stronger mechanisms for international coordination to accelerate innovation and deployment in each major emitting sector of the global economy. The principles also address issues such as technology collaboration, best-practice sharing, investment tracking, ensuring people-centred transitions, and integrating energy security and affordability into net zero plans.

To support stronger government actions, the IEA on 18 May will publish the first comprehensive roadmap for the global energy sector to reach net-zero emissions by 2050. Requested by the COP26 Presidency as a key input, the roadmap will set out a pathway for what is needed from governments, companies, investors and citizens to put global emissions on a path in line with a temperature rise of 1.5 degrees. The roadmap will help decision makers to prioritise urgent action in the lead-up to Glasgow.

Also taking place today was the Climate and Development Ministerial, hosted by COP26 President Sharma and UK Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab, which focussed on countries that are most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and helping them set the international agenda in the run-up to COP26 in November. The global gathering brought together countries and partners to build consensus and practical solutions on key issues such as responding to climate impacts, fiscal space and debt, and climate finance.
The International Energy Agency held its 6th Annual Global Conference on Energy Efficiency today, bringing together high-level speakers to discuss the role energy efficiency plays in achieving ambitious climate goals and how to reverse worrying signs of stalling progress.

Participants included ministers and other senior government figures from countries and institutions including Canada, China, the European Union, Japan, Nigeria, the United Kingdom, the United States and the United Nations Environment Programme.

In addition to energy efficiency’s essential role in reaching climate goals, speakers at the conference emphasized its many benefits in relation to job creation, economic growth, alleviation of fuel poverty, promotion of access to energy and other important areas. A major theme echoed by leaders from business, civil society and government was the need to work together, not just across sectors, but also internationally to accelerate action together.

In his opening remarks at the conference, IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol highlighted that global energy-related CO2 emissions had risen above pre-Covid pandemic levels by the end of 2020 – and that last year’s gains in energy efficiency were the slowest in a decade.

“Our analysis is very clear: In the absence of strengthening energy efficiency initiatives around the world, we have no chance whatsoever of meeting our energy and climate goals,” Dr Birol said. “We call on the governments with us today to make use of their existing efficiency policies but also to push the next generation of policies – making use of digital technologies, smart grids and other key solutions.”

During the discussions, speakers underscored the important role that super-efficient equipment – like air conditioning, lighting and industrial motors – will play in the journey to net-zero emissions. They highlighted the Super-Efficient Equipment and Appliance Deployment Initiative and its role in raising ambition for energy efficiency progress worldwide.

Key themes and messages from the day’s conversations will be picked up at tomorrow’s IEA-COP26 Net-Zero Summit, which will address how to make net-zero energy systems a reality in the coming decades.

The full agenda of high-level speakers is below, as well as the video of the entire conference for replay.

Session 1: Next-Generation Efficiency Policy for High-Ambition Targets

HE Anne-Marie Trevelyan, Minister of State for Business, Energy and Clean Growth, United Kingdom

Ms Inger Andersen, Executive Director, UN Environment Programme

HE Dr Mohammad Mahmood Abubakar, Minister of Environment, Nigeria

Mr Su Wei, Deputy Secretary-General, National Development and Reform Commission, China

HE Kiyoshi Ejima, State Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry, Japan

HE Claude Turmes, Minister of Energy, Luxembourg

HE Kadri Simson, Commissioner for Energy, European Commission

Session 1 Panel Discussion:

Mr Rashid Ali Abdallah, Executive Director of the African Energy Commission

Ms Joyce Henry, Director General for Natural Resources Canada

Dr Kathleen Hogan, Acting Under Secretary for Science & Energy, US Department of Energy

Ms Ditte Juul Joergensen, Director General for Energy, European Commission

Session 2: Super-Efficient Products for Net-Zero Transitions

Mr Jamshyd Godrej, Chairman and Managing Director, Godrej & Boyce

Mr Daniel Zhang, CEO, BROAD Group

Ms Paula R. Glover, President, Alliance to Save Energy

Mr Kim Fausing, CEO, Danfoss

Session 2 Panel Discussion:
In preparation for the IEA-COP26 Net Zero Summit on 31 March, the European Commission and the International Energy Agency join forces to underline the essential contribution of the energy sector to achieving a climate neutral economy with net-zero greenhouse gas emissions. According to the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, reaching net zero by mid-century is required to keep global warming within 1.5 degrees and stay on the safer side of the Paris Agreement. Energy systems are at the core of this effort and they are highly interconnected with mobility, buildings, industry and land-use sectors.

Executive Vice President Frans Timmermans said: “The European Union is determined to reach net zero by 2050 and we urge others to join us in this effort. Europe is anchoring its course with the EU Climate Law and the upcoming package of measures to deliver our -55% reduction target for 2030. The more countries join with their own commitments, the higher the impact of our actions across the globe, not least in access to clean energy. The world needs a clear and predictable pathway to a clean and safe future. There is no time to waste.”

Energy Commissioner Kadri Simson said: “Accelerating a sustainable clean energy transition is indispensable for achieving net-zero economies. This is a major pillar of the European Green Deal and our dialogues with international partners. A resolute focus on energy efficiency, renewables, green hydrogen, the reduction of methane emissions and a just transition will be key. That’s why we support the IEA work on the Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions, and we are ready to have a platform open to our partners to share the long-lasting expertise developed by the European Commission in this field.”

IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol said: “The IEA is strongly committed to combatting climate change, and we have put clean energy transitions and the path to net zero at the core of our work. We are working with all our member governments and beyond on ensuring a sustainable, secure and affordable future for all citizens. The EU is a leader in the fight against climate change, and the IEA is proud to deepen our collaboration with it on accelerating clean energy transitions. We all need to roll up our sleeves as we step up our efforts to turn ambitions into reality.”

The European Commission and the International Energy Agency agreed to join forces to:

Accelerate and expand the net-zero movement of governments and companies committed to helping deliver the energy sector’s contribution to achieving net-zero economies;

Develop a collaborative international net-zero campaign with interested partners to raise awareness and accelerate the transitions to net zero, as an urgent call for action.

Team up with willing partners in support of African countries’ efforts to develop access to affordable modern energy services from sustainable sources and clean technologies, leapfrogging to advanced stages of sustainable development;

Feed into the global conversation on net-zero greenhouse gas economies, welcoming the upcoming IEA global Net Zero in 2050 Roadmap on 18 May, which will be guiding future work across the IEA, including the annual World Energy Outlook, and contributions to the first Paris Agreement Global Stocktake in 2023 on progress towards multilateral climate goals.

Enable citizens to benefit from transition opportunities and to navigate disruptions. Governments in the EU and elsewhere should continue to explore and step up new ways to share best practices in designing energy policies towards climate neutral economies that are inclusive, including as part of the work of the IEA’s Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions.

For more information:
The IEA Executive Director, Fatih Birol, and Indonesia’s Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources, Arifin Tasrif, today announced the IEA-Indonesia Energy Transition Alliance, marking a step-change in ambition for Indonesia’s energy transition.

The Alliance enhances collaboration between Indonesia and the IEA on tackling the emerging energy challenges of our time – both within Indonesia and internationally. It acts as a framework to work together to support policy development, accelerate Indonesia’s energy transition, and mobilize high-level political engagement. The Alliance will allow the IEA and Indonesia to build new partnerships and launch new workstreams to support Indonesia’s international energy leadership.

The IEA has been working closely with the government of Indonesia since 2015, and the Agency’s Clean Energy Transitions Programme has strengthened this engagement. With support from this IEA Programme, Indonesia is launching in 2021 new presidential priorities on renewable power and clean energy technologies, and a new national energy strategy and roadmap. In 2022, Indonesia will hold the Presidency of the G20. And in 2023, it will assume the Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). During this critical period of policy evolution and international leadership for Indonesia, a key imperative is to ensure economies around the world recover from the Covid-19 crisis in a sustainable, and resilient way.

Indonesia’s President Joko Widodo highlighted the strong emphasis his government is putting on the landmark initiative, announcing that he “supports Indonesia's Alliance with the International Energy Agency to secure the transformation towards clean and renewable energy.”

Starting in 2021, the Alliance will underpin the IEA’s ongoing support for Indonesia’s energy transition and economic modernisation – including power system enhancement, renewables deployment, energy efficiency implementation and the strengthening of energy investment.

“As Indonesia emerges from the Covid-19 crisis and takes major steps towards growing its economy and modernising its energy sector, the decisions it takes in the next few years will have major impacts on regional and global energy trends,” said Dr Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “I am very excited to launch this new Alliance with Minister Tasrif and honoured to have the support of President Joko Widodo in this important endeavour.”

The Alliance aims to make progress in 2021 to enhance the conditions for scaling up both the IEA’s and broader international support for Indonesia’s energy ambitions. This will be underpinned by the IEA’s unique position within the G20, enabling it to support Indonesia’s Presidency in 2022. All these processes will in turn inform and strengthen the planning and formation of Indonesia’s priorities as ASEAN Chair in 2023.

“Indonesia has set ambitious renewable energy targets outlined in energy transition policies and major national strategies, including the National Grand Strategy on Energy,” said Mr Tasrif, Indonesia’s Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources. “The IEA has been a key partner of Indonesia for years, helping Indonesia develop these goals – and I am pleased the IEA will scale up this support through the IEA-Indonesia Energy Transition Alliance to help materialize these targets.”

At the heart of the IEA-Indonesia collaboration on energy transitions is the IEA’s commitment to engage with key partner governments on energy policy priorities. Since Indonesia became an IEA Association country in 2015, bilateral cooperation has strengthened across a wide range of fuels and technologies, spanning areas such as digitalisation, technology implementation, investment conditions, and policy and regulatory support.

With a population of more than 270 million citizens spread across 17,000 islands, Indonesia is expected to become the world’s fourth-largest economy by mid-century. Its young population, abundant natural resources, vast untapped renewable energy potential and the President’s ambition to modernize its energy sector put Indonesia in a prime position to become a major player in the future of global energy.

The IEA is leading clean energy transitions globally through its authoritative position as a trusted source of world-class data, analysis and policy recommendations – and through its work on the ground helping governments turn policies into action.
World oil markets have rebounded from the massive demand shock triggered by Covid-19 but still face a high degree of uncertainty that is testing the industry as never before, according to a new IEA report.

The forecast for global oil demand has shifted lower, and demand could peak earlier than previously thought if a rising focus by governments on clean energy turns into stronger policies and behavioural changes induced by the pandemic become deeply rooted, according to Oil 2021, the IEA’s latest annual medium-term market report. But in the report’s base case, which reflects current policy settings, oil demand is set to rise to 104 million barrels a day (mb/d) by 2026, up 4% from 2019 levels.

“The Covid-19 crisis caused a historic decline in global oil demand – but not necessarily a lasting one. Achieving an orderly transition away from oil is essential to meet climate goals, but it will require major policy changes from governments as well as accelerated behavioural changes. Without that, global oil demand is set to increase every year between now and 2026,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director. “For the world’s oil demand to peak anytime soon, significant action is needed immediately to improve fuel efficiency standards, boost electric vehicle sales and curb oil use in the power sector.”

Those actions – combined with increased teleworking, greater recycling and reduced business travel – could reduce oil use by as much as 5.6 mb/d by 2026, which would mean that global oil demand never gets back to where it was before the pandemic.

Asia will continue to dominate growth in global oil demand, accounting for 90% of the increase between 2019 and 2026 in the IEA report’s base case. By contrast, demand in many advanced economies, where vehicle ownership and oil use per capita are much higher, is not expected to return to pre-crisis levels.

On the supply side, the heightened uncertainty over the outlook has created a dilemma for producers. Investment decisions made today could either bring on too much capacity that is left unused or too little oil to meet demand. Only a marginal rise in global upstream investment is expected this year after operators spent one-third less in 2020 than planned at the start of the year.

In the IEA report, the world’s oil production capacity is projected to increase by 5 mb/d by 2026. At the same time, the historic collapse in demand has resulted in a spare production capacity cushion of a record 9 mb/d that could keep global markets comfortable in the near term.

To meet the growth in oil demand to 2026 in the IEA report’s base case, supply needs to rise by 10 mb/d by 2026. The Middle East, led by Saudi Arabia, is expected to provide half that increase, largely from existing shut-in capacity. The region’s expanding market share would mark a dramatic shift from recent years when the United States dominated growth. Based on today’s policy settings, US supply growth is set to resume as investment and activity levels pick up, yet any increase is unlikely to match the lofty levels seen in recent years.

“No oil and gas company will be unaffected by clean energy transitions, so every part of the industry needs to consider how to respond as momentum builds behind the world’s drive for net-zero emissions,” said Dr Birol. “Minimising emissions from their core operations, notably methane, is an urgent priority. In addition, there are technologies vital to energy transitions that can be a match for oil and gas company capabilities, such as carbon capture, low-carbon hydrogen, biofuels and offshore wind. In many cases, these can help decarbonise sectors where emissions are hardest to tackle. It’s encouraging to see some oil and gas companies scaling up their commitments in these areas, but much more needs to be done.”

The global refining sector is struggling with excess capacity. Shutdowns of at least 6 mb/d will be required to allow utilisation rates to return to normal levels. Meanwhile, China, the Middle East and India continue to drive new capacity growth. As a result, Asian crude oil imports are forecast to surge to 27 mb/d by 2026, requiring record levels of Middle Eastern crude and Atlantic Basin production to fill the gap.

The petrochemical industry will continue to lead demand growth, with ethane, LPG and naphtha together accounting for 70% of the forecast increase in oil product demand to 2026. Gasoline demand may have peaked, though, as efficiency gains and the shift to electric vehicles offset mobility growth in emerging and developing economies.

Demand for aviation fuels, the area that was hardest hit by the pandemic, is forecast to gradually return to pre-crisis levels. But a shift to online meetings and conferences – along with persistent corporate efforts to cut costs and hesitation by some citizens to resume leisure travel – could permanently alter travel trends.
The first meeting of the Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions took place today, bringing together more than 20 high-profile energy and climate figures from around the world to discuss how to empower citizens and communities to navigate the changes of a rapidly evolving energy sector.

The Global Commission – also known as Our Inclusive Energy Future – is headed by Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen of Denmark. It was convened by Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. Today’s virtual meeting was chaired by Dan Jørgensen, Denmark’s Minister of Climate, Energy and Utilities, and co-chaired by Sophie Gladima, Senegal’s Minister of Petroleum and Energy.

A key focus of the discussion was employment and how to maximise the benefits of new job opportunities from clean energy while protecting workers and communities negatively affected by employment shifts and job losses. The importance of establishing a meaningful dialogue between government, industry and representatives of workers and other affected groups was also a recurring theme in the conversation.

The meeting underscored the value of a global conversation about how clean energy transitions affect people and communities. The discussion highlighted common challenges while recognising differing local circumstances. A central concern was the need to find ways to fund the necessary actions to protect and support people and communities, particularly the most vulnerable. Participants acknowledged the importance of ensuring all people have access to clean, affordable and secure energy throughout the complex process of clean energy transitions.

There was wide consensus on the value of identifying success stories and ensuring the lessons are learned from past failures. Commission members agreed to develop a set of solution-oriented recommendations that could be used for different country contexts.

“The enthusiasm of so many ministers and other global figures to engage in a long and rich dialogue today demonstrates the critical importance of this issue around the world, with countries seeking to turn ambitious climate goals into effective clean energy policies that benefit all their citizens,” said Dr Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “I would like thank the Global Commission members for bringing their time and insights to this vital endeavour.”

A report from the Global Commission meeting will form an important part of the IEA-COP26 Net Zero Summit, which takes place on 31 March. The Summit will provide a forum for top international energy and climate leaders from the world’s largest economies to accelerate the momentum behind clean energy and examine how countries can work together more effectively to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions.
The IEA Executive Director, Dr Fatih Birol, held a bilateral meeting with the new US Secretary of Energy, Jennifer Granholm, on 10 March to discuss the vital relationship between the IEA and the US government, one of the Agency’s founding members.

The video conference was the first meeting between the two following Ms Granholm’s confirmation as Secretary of Energy in the cabinet of President Joe Biden. The dynamic conversation covered a range of issues, including the US government’s energy and climate priorities and the IEA’s leadership role in clean energy transitions worldwide.

Dr Birol highlighted the upcoming IEA-COP26 Net Zero Summit on 31 March – which will bring together heads of government, ministers, CEOs and civil society leaders from around the world – and the IEA’s report, due for release on 18 May, that will provide a comprehensive roadmap for the global energy sector to reach net-zero emissions by 2050.

Ms Granholm and Dr Birol also discussed global energy governance, including the next IEA Ministerial Meeting, and possible opportunities for collaboration between the US Department of Energy and the IEA in near future.
The International Energy Agency today announced that more high-profile energy and climate figures from around the world – including government ministers and civil society leaders – have become members of its Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions, which will hold its first meeting on 15 March.

Headed by Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen of Denmark, the Global Commission – also known as Our Inclusive Energy Future – will examine ways to ensure people are at the centre of clean energy transitions worldwide. It was convened by Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director, and is chaired by Dan Jørgensen, Denmark’s Minister of Climate, Energy and Utilities, and co-chaired by Sophie Gladima, Senegalese Minister of Petroleum and Energy.



The prominent government figures who have joined the Commission since it was first launched in late January are Roberto Cingolani, Italian Minister for Ecological Transition; Leonore Gewessler, Minister of Climate Action, Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation and Technology, Austria; Hiroshi Kajiyama, Japanese Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry; Michał Kurtyka, Polish Minister of Climate and Environment; Joe Manchin, US Senator and Chairman of the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources; Kadri Simson, European Commissioner for Energy; and Simonetta Sommaruga, Swiss Federal Councillor for Environment, Transport, Energy and Communications.

The leading civil society representatives who have become members are Christiana Figueres, Founding Partner of Global Optimism Group and former Executive Secretary of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change; and Beniamin Strzelecki and Chiagozie Udeh, Global Focal Points for the SDG 7 Youth Constituency. The full list of all 26 members to date is available below. The commission will provide key recommendations as an input to COP26 in Glasgow in November.

“Clean energy transitions will affect people’s livelihoods. They will offer new careers and create new jobs – but they will also affect workers and communities that are reliant on industries and fuels that are set to decline,” said Dr Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “I’m extremely glad that such a diverse and influential group of leaders from government and civil society worldwide have come together in the Global Commission to address these critical issues. Clean energy transitions will fail if they are not focused on people.”

As countries seek to advance their shifts to clean energy technologies, the success of these efforts will rest on enabling citizens to benefit from the opportunities and navigate the disruptions. This includes social and economic impacts on individuals and communities, as well as issues of affordability and fairness.

Our Inclusive Energy Future will explore these questions in depth, taking into account the need to see people as active participants in clean energy transitions – in collective decision-making and through individual actions and behaviours. Equity and inclusion issues will also be examined, including gender equality.

For more information, you can visit the Global Commission’s web page here.
Top international energy and climate leaders from the world’s largest economies will take part in the IEA-COP26 Net Zero Summit on 31 March to accelerate the momentum behind clean energy and examine how countries can work together more effectively to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to net zero in line with shared international goals.

Co-hosted by IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol and COP26 President Alok Sharma, the Net Zero Summit is a critical milestone on the road to COP26 in Glasgow in November. The Summit will include a dynamic dialogue between the world’s major economies, which are also large emitters, with the participation of US Presidential Special Envoy for Climate John Kerry, Chinese Special Envoy on Climate Change Xie Zhenhua, European Commission Executive Vice-President Frans Timmermans and Indian Minister of Power, New and Renewable Energy Raj Kumar Singh.

“The world’s growing clean energy and climate ambitions are sending an unmistakable signal. Over 120 governments have announced their intentions to bring emissions to zero by the middle of this century. A tremendous amount now needs to be done to turn ambitions into reality: long-term targets by themselves will not suffice, as the recent rebound in global CO2 emissions shows,” said Dr Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “We’re delighted that all the world’s major players will come together at our Net Zero Summit to identify how to work together to turn targets into meaningful near-term energy actions to cut emissions and put the world on a sustainable path toward 1.5 degrees. This is vital to build momentum ahead of COP26 later this year.”

“To keep our climate goals within reach the next ten years must be a decade of delivery, not deliberation. This is why the UK, as host of COP26, is pushing for much stronger international collaboration on climate change as one of its top priorities,” said Mr Sharma, the COP26 President. “The IEA-COP26 Net Zero Summit will be an important opportunity for the world’s major economies to agree how they can work together to make the transition towards net zero by 2050 faster, cheaper and easier for all.”

High-profile energy and climate leaders attending the Summit will represent countries that together account for the vast majority of global energy demand and greenhouse gas emissions, including Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Czech Republic, Ethiopia, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Slovakia and Spain. Global figures from business and civil society will also take part alongside youth representatives.

Following the opening sessions, a series of Ministerial Panels will address key issues for global clean energy transitions:

Ensuring People-Centred Transitions

Catalysing Near-Term Implementation

Accelerating Technology and Innovation by Sector

Mobilising Clean Energy Investment

The panels will be co-chaired by Ministers from governments including Canada, China, Denmark, India, Indonesia, South Africa, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States.

During the closing plenary session, leaders will reflect on the major priorities for action in the run-up to COP26 in Glasgow and the subsequent IEA Ministerial Meeting, and on how to strengthen the international clean energy architecture going into 2022 and beyond.

The Summit will provide a unique forum for dialogue among governments on how to implement their emissions pledges. IEA analysis shows that decisive action to boost clean energy is essential to drive sustainable recoveries worldwide over the next two to three years, setting the tone for ambitious and sustained emissions reductions through into the 2030s. Efficient multilateral mechanisms like the IEA are crucial for catalysing and supporting these efforts.

The global energy system is even more interconnected today than it was when the IEA was founded nearly half a century ago. And just as one country could do little on its own in response to the oil shocks that were crippling the world economy then, governments today cannot transform the global energy system through individual efforts alone.

To help countries turn their ambitions into coherent real-world action, the IEA will publish on 18 May the world’s first comprehensive roadmap for the global energy sector to reach net-zero emissions by 2050. Commissioned by the UK government’s COP26 Presidency, this unprecedented piece of IEA analysis will be a vital foundation for building a global consensus on reaching net-zero emissions, informing discussions at COP26 in November and beyond.
Turkey has made solid progress in recent years in improving the security and diversity of its energy supplies but should also pay close attention to the sustainability and longer-term carbon footprint of its energy sector, according to a new policy review by the International Energy Agency.

Since the previous IEA in-depth review of Turkey in 2016, market reform and energy security have remained the guiding principles of the government’s energy policy. Rapid economic and population growth in the past two decades have not only driven strong growth in energy demand but also an increase in import dependency, especially for oil and gas.

As a result, Turkey has emphasised security of energy supply as one of the central pillars of its energy strategy. This includes efforts to expand domestic oil and gas exploration and production – which received a significant boost from the recent discovery of the giant Sakarya gas field in the Black Sea –and to diversify oil and gas supply sources and infrastructure.

Turkey has also sought to strengthen the security of its energy supply by increasing production of renewable energy and reducing energy consumption through increased energy efficiency. Auctions, in particular, have proven successful in driving down costs and increasing investments in renewables. The planned commissioning of Turkey’s first nuclear power facility in 2023 will further diversify the country’s low-carbon fuel mix.

“Turkey has seen significant diversification of its energy mix in the past decade. In particular, bolstered by a supportive policy environment, renewable energy has grown impressively, led by hydropower, solar and wind,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director, who is launching the report today with Dr Alparslan Bayraktar, Turkey’s Deputy Minister for Energy and Natural Resources.

Turkey’s renewable capacity grew by 50% over the last five years. In 2019, Turkey had the fifth highest level of new renewable capacity additions in Europe and the 15th highest in the world. The IEA report notes that Turkey can achieve even stronger growth in renewables – especially solar, wind and geothermal – given its considerable resource endowment. Its rich potential for expansion of renewables is not limited to electricity generation but is also relevant in the heating sector. Notably, Turkey uses only an estimated 3% of its solar and 15% of its onshore wind potential.

For Turkey to establish a modern and competitive economy, the report highlights that the government should pay close attention to the sustainability of its energy sector and its longer-term carbon footprint. In particular, Turkey should reconsider the role of lignite-based power generation in a low-carbon future. It will be equally important to direct industrial policy to take into account the growing momentum behind global clean energy transitions. This can take the form of further promoting innovation in areas such as electric vehicles, energy storage and digital technologies.

Turkey has already made significant progress on liberalising energy markets in the last decade, successfully improving predictability and transparency in pricing. However, additional reforms to make gas and electricity markets more competitive will help mobilise the investments needed by these sectors, including for clean energy technologies.

“Turkey has achieved impressive results in the past decade in liberalising its energy markets, boosting the role of renewables and improving its energy security. I hope this report will help inform Turkish policy makers’ decisions as they look to navigate the next phase of the country’s energy development in the most cost-effective, secure and sustainable way possible,” said Dr Birol.
As part of its deepening partnership with Indonesia, the International Energy Agency recently held a series of webinars and on smart grids and power sector interconnection with Indonesia’s Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR) and national electricity utility PLN.

Participants included Indonesian Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources Arifin Tasrif and IEA Director of Energy Markets and Security Keisuke Sadamori. The webinars initiated an important dialogue across industry, academia, government and international institutions on how smarter grids can be utilised as an enabling tool for in Indonesia’s energy transition.

“We were pleased to convene this important series of events with Minister Tasrif and MEMR colleagues, which shows Indonesia’s commitment to modernising the power sector for a cleaner and more secure future, as well as the IEA’s commitment to scale up real-world clean energy transition implementation work in Indonesia,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “I look forward to this work continuing to evolve and grow as we seek to rapidly enhance engagement with Indonesia in 2021.”

Expected to become the world’s fourth largest economy by 2045, Indonesia is critical for global clean energy transitions. The country is a key part of the IEA family and an important focus for the Agency’s work and collaboration. Indonesia is experiencing rapid growth in its economy and energy demand. To meet this, the government has a substantial pipeline of new planned coal-fired power plants and a target of 23% renewable energy in the energy mix by 2025. Indonesia has achieved near universal electricity access, overcoming the challenges of its archipelagic geography. Nevertheless, in order to fully modernise its electricity system and deliver cost-effective, reliable and lower-carbon power to all Indonesians, the country’s electricity sector must undergo a fundamental transformation.

As part of this transformation, the government of Indonesia has mandated PLN to deploy smart grids through its 2020-2024 National Medium-Term Development Plan. The recent webinar series consisted of three events focusing respectively on: building consensus around what smart grids are for Indonesia; a deep dive into transmission development; and different applications and implementations of smart grids. The second and third events each gathered over 300 stakeholders from Indonesia, IEA member countries and international organisations.

During the webinars, speakers from the IEA and key IEA partners, both in government and the private sector, discussed their technical and policy-relevant experiences around deploying smart grids. Indonesian policy makers and senior officials, including Minister Tasrif, described Indonesia’s priorities, constraints, targets and progress.

In particular, speakers and participants highlighted the need for specific implementation plans that take into account the diverse contexts of both the main interconnected islands and more remote areas of Indonesia. Speakers and participants left with a greater understanding of the importance of the need for a holistic approach to smart grids and grid enhancement that includes technological improvement, procedural and institutional strengthening, and greater integration across generation, transmission and distribution systems.

The IEA will continue to support the efforts of the MEMR and PLN to enhance Indonesia’s power system in the context of the economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis and clean energy transitions, as requested by MEMR counterparts. In doing so, the IEA will also continue to collaborate with a broad set of stakeholders, providing detailed analysis on flexibility needs, grid investments, process enhancement and policy strengthening. These efforts will support the ongoing work of the government of Indonesia in creating a modern power sector.

The webinars and related work are part of the IEA’s Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging Economies programme, which has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme.
The IEA Executive Director, Dr Fatih Birol, and the President of COP26, Alok Sharma, met in Paris on 3 March to discuss priorities for accelerating clean energy transitions worldwide in the lead-up to COP26 in Glasgow in November.

At the bilateral meeting, Dr Birol and Mr Sharma, assessed the current state of global climate diplomacy and considered how the IEA and the COP26 Presidency can work together to help countries develop ambitious long-term CO2 reduction targets while also immediately implementing real-world actions to cut their emissions.

They discussed the importance of IEA data and analysis in informing the global energy and climate conversation. This included the latest update on energy-related CO2 emissions trends, which was released on 2 March and showed a strong rebound in global emissions over the course of 2020 following the pandemic-induced slump in April. They agreed that the comprehensive global roadmap for reaching net-zero emissions in 2050 that the IEA will release on 18 May can help build momentum towards COP26.

Dr Birol and Mr Sharma, who was on a two-day visit to Paris for meetings, reviewed progress on preparations for the IEA-COP26 Net Zero Summit on 31 March that they will co-host. The Summit is a key multilateral milestone on the road to COP26 in Glasgow. It will bring together heads of government, ministers, CEOs and civil society leaders from all corners of the globe to focus on how to move from climate targets to real-world energy policy actions that can rapidly bring down emissions.
Japan will need to move quickly to make headway on the steep emissions reductions that are required to achieve its recently announced ambition of reaching carbon-neutrality by 2050, the International Energy Agency said today in its latest in-depth review of the country’s energy policies.

Nearly a decade after the 2011 earthquake and the resulting Fukushima nuclear accident, Japan has made real progress towards developing a more efficient, resilient and sustainable energy system. It has embarked on major reforms of its energy market and diversified its energy mix. Energy-related CO2 emissions have fallen continuously since their peak in 2013, thanks to the expansion of renewable energy, the restart of some nuclear power plants and energy efficiency gains. By 2018, Japan’s emissions had declined to a level last seen in 2009. Reliance on fossil fuels has also declined but remains high at nearly 90% of energy supply, making Japan among the most carbon-intensive economies of IEA members.

“Japan needs to accelerate the deployment of low-carbon technologies, remove regulatory barriers and increase competition in its energy markets if it is to reach carbon-neutrality by 2050. I welcome Japan’s new Green Growth Strategy that puts emphasis on these priorities. The IEA is committed to supporting the government in these vital efforts,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director, who launched the report today at an online event with Shin Hosaka, Commissioner of the Agency for Natural Resources and Energy at Japan’s Ministry for Economy, Trade and Industry.

The new IEA report on Japan’s policies analyses its energy challenges and recommends possible solutions to help it achieve a secure, affordable and sustainable energy future. It finds that Japan has made important strides in reforming its domestic electricity and natural gas markets. The increasing competition in these sectors is encouraging, but further reform is needed to achieve a true level playing field for all market participants. Additional regulatory reforms will be important to encourage investments in zero-emissions electricity and to improve power system flexibility. The IEA also calls for policy makers to ensure that the market regulator has sufficient powers and independence.

The report highlights that Japan has seen continuous growth in renewables in the power sector, but that grid constraints have hampered investment in new projects and posed challenges to security of supply. Creating a well-integrated national grid and taking steps to improve the operational efficiency of the electricity system will facilitate the integration of more renewables while enhancing system resilience. The recent cold snap in January led to very low reserve margins in Japan’s electricity systems. This event provided a reminder of the importance of regional interconnections and the need to have sufficient generation capacity.

The IEA welcomes the government’s recent announcement to phase out inefficient coal plants by 2030. This will further improve the already high efficiency of Japan’s thermal power fleet. Yet even efficient coal plants emit more CO2 than any other power generation source, and Japan ranks among the few IEA members that plan to add new coal capacity. Japan should tackle emissions from those new coal power plants by retrofitting, repurposing them as flexibility sources or able to use other fuels, or through other measures to help them avoid becoming stranded assets.

The IEA report highlights that Japan’s strong innovation and technology base can play a vital role in developing the technologies needed to achieve its 2050 energy and climate ambitions. “I applaud Japan for its leadership in advancing low-carbon hydrogen and carbon-recycling technologies, which will be crucial for decarbonising sectors where emissions are hardest to reduce, such as long-distance transport and heavy industry,” Dr Birol said.

Reducing the costs of these technologies will be essential to promote their deployment at scale. Stronger reliance on market-based instruments is an additional option for Japan to reduce emissions cost-effectively, foster innovation for low-carbon technologies and further increase Japan’s already high level of energy efficiency.
The IEA Executive Director, Dr Fatih Birol, met with the new US Special Presidential Envoy for Climate, John Kerry, on 1 March to discuss ways to strengthen the collaboration between the IEA and the United States.

During a bilateral video call, Dr Birol and Mr Kerry reviewed global efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions with the aim of reaching international climate and sustainable energy goals. They discussed the IEA’s priorities for 2021, which is a critical year for global climate action and building momentum toward the objective of reaching net-zero emissions.

Mr Kerry underscored the urgent work of cutting emissions and the role the IEA has to play in making sure countries have the information they need to take action. He expressed strong interest in the IEA’s upcoming report that will provide a roadmap to reaching net-zero emissions by 2050.

Dr Birol welcomed the return of US leadership on climate issues notably the new US administration’s move to rejoin the Paris Agreement. He highlighted the immediate challenge that governments’ economic recovery plans are so far not delivering enough in the way of policies and investments to accelerate clean energy transitions and achieve a rapid and sustained decline in emissions over the coming decade.

Mr Kerry confirmed he would participate in the upcoming IEA-COP26 Net Zero Summit on 31 March, which will bring together heads of government, ministers, CEOs and civil society leaders from all corners of the globe to focus on how to move from climate targets to real-world actions that can rapidly bring down emissions.
The Covid-19 crisis in 2020 triggered the largest annual drop in global energy-related carbon dioxide emissions since the Second World War, according to IEA data released today, but the overall decline of about 6% masks wide variations depending on the region and the time of year.

After hitting a low in April, global emissions rebounded strongly and rose above 2019 levels in December. The latest data show that global emissions were 2%, or 60 million tonnes, higher in December 2020 than they were in the same month a year earlier. Major economies led the resurgence as a pick-up in economic activity pushed energy demand higher and significant policies measures to boost clean energy were lacking. Many economies are now seeing emissions climbing above pre-crisis levels.

“The rebound in global carbon emissions toward the end of last year is a stark warning that not enough is being done to accelerate clean energy transitions worldwide. If governments don’t move quickly with the right energy policies, this could put at risk the world’s historic opportunity to make 2019 the definitive peak in global emissions,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “In March 2020, the IEA urged governments to put clean energy at the heart of their economic stimulus plans to ensure a sustainable recovery. But our numbers show we are returning to carbon-intensive business-as-usual. This year is pivotal for international climate action – and it began with high hopes – but these latest numbers are a sharp reminder of the immense challenge we face in rapidly transforming the global energy system.”

The 2020 trends underscore the challenge of curbing emissions while ensuring economic growth and energy security. Amid a growing number of pledges by countries and companies to reach net-zero emissions by mid-century, the rebound in emissions shows what is likely to happen if those ambitions are not met with rapid and tangible action.

Emissions in China for the whole of 2020 increased by 0.8%, or 75 million tonnes, from 2019 levels driven by China’s economic recovery over the course of the year. China was the first major economy to emerge from the pandemic and lift restrictions, prompting its economic activity and emissions to rebound from April onward. China was the only major economy that grew in 2020.

In India, emissions rose above 2019 levels from September as economic activity improved and restrictions were relaxed. In Brazil, the rebound of road transport activity after the April low drove a recovery in oil demand, while increases in gas demand in the later months of 2020 pushed emissions above 2019 levels throughout the final quarter.

Emissions in the United States fell by 10% in 2020. But on a monthly basis, after hitting their lowest levels in the spring, they started to bounce back. In December, US emissions were approaching the level seen in the same month in 2019. This was the result of accelerating economic activity as well as the combination of higher natural gas prices and colder weather favouring an increase in coal use.

“If current expectations for a global economic rebound this year are confirmed – and in the absence of major policy changes in the world’s largest economies – global emissions are likely to increase in 2021,” Dr Birol said. “Nonetheless, there are still reasons for optimism. China has set an ambitious carbon-neutrality target; the new US administration has rejoined the Paris Agreement and is putting climate at the heart of its policy-making; the European Union is pushing ahead with its Green Deal and sustainable recovery plans; India’s stunning success with renewables could transform its energy future; and the United Kingdom is building global momentum toward stronger climate action at COP26 in November.”

Global emissions plunged by almost 2 billion tonnes in 2020, the largest absolute decline in history. Most of this – around 1 billion tonnes, which is more than the annual emissions of Japan – was due to lower use of oil for road transport and aviation. As travel and economic activities pick up around the world, oil consumption and its emissions are rising again. The record increase in sales of electric vehicles is insufficient to offset the growth in emissions caused by the uptick in road traffic around the world.

Global emissions from the electricity sector dropped by 450 million tonnes in 2020. This resulted partly from lower electricity demand but also from increases in electricity generation by solar PV and wind. For the world to achieve the climate goals of the Paris Agreement, notably of limiting global warming to well below 2 °C, a decline in electricity sector emissions of around 500 million tonnes would need to occur every single year. Even greater annual drops in emissions from electricity generation would be required to put the world on a path in line with warming of 1.5 °C.

In order to show a sustainable path forward, the IEA will publish on 18 May the world’s first comprehensive roadmap for the energy sector to reach net-zero emissions by 2050. As part of its focus on leading clean energy transitions worldwide, the IEA is working with the United Kingdom’s COP26 Presidency to bring together heads of government and ministers at the IEA-COP26 Net Zero Summit on 31 March to step up international efforts to turn net zero pledges into concrete energy policies and actions.

In April, the IEA will release its Global Energy Review 2021, which will examine this year’s emerging trends in global energy demand and CO2 emissions.
Accurate, comparable and timely energy data and statistics are fundamental to developing effective and efficient national energy policies, as well as a key element in longer-term planning for investment in the energy sector. This has become increasingly important in the face of the necessity to transform our energy systems to meet the challenges of sustainability, security and inclusion.

To this end, the IEA Energy Data Centre provides the world’s most authoritative and comprehensive source of global energy data, and as part of its multi-year data modernisation strategy in February 2020 the IEA started publishing an early release of its complete supply and demand energy statistics, energy balances and CO2 emissions data. This release proved to be of great value to policymakers in IEA member countries, as well as non-member countries.

As such, in 2021 we have gone one step further, expanding our coverage in the early release to cover more than 60% of global total energy supply and over 63% of global CO2 emissions related to fuel combustion. In addition to significant member countries such as Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States, the data covers important emerging economies such as China, India, Brazil and South Africa.

Please visit the IEA Data and Statistics webpage to learn more about the early release and IEA data products more generally. And, note that as in previous years, there will be a further release in April that will include all annual fuels with full OECD coverage; as well as a release in July with global coverage, as well as supply information up to 2020.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) and the Central American Integration System (SICA) have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to promote clean energy transitions in Central America. Under the MoU, the two organisations will expand their cooperation on energy data and statistics, energy efficiency and climate resilience of electricity systems. These have all been identified as key areas for energy transitions and climate change mitigation in the region under SICA’s Central American 2030 Sustainable Energy Strategy.

“The IEA is pleased to team up with SICA to expand our work in Central America, a dynamic region that is home to over 55 million people and has excellent clean energy potential with distinctive transition opportunities and challenges,” said IEA Deputy Executive Director David Turk.

Under its Clean Energy Transitions Programme, the IEA has been expanding its collaboration in Latin America. This is taking place both bilaterally with key partner countries – including the two largest economies, Brazil and Mexico – and on a regional level through cooperation with leading regional organisations, including the Latin American Energy Organisation (OLADE) and the Inter-American Development Bank. The signing of the IEA-SICA Memorandum of Understanding is a new milestone for the IEA’s engagement with the region.

“Today’s signing ceremony marks an important step for SICA’s work on clean energy transitions – an important priority for our member countries, which can now benefit from the IEA’s leading analysis and expertise,” said Vinicio Cerezo, SICA Secretary General.

The Central American Integration System (Sistema de Integración Centroamericana, or SICA) is an economic and political organisation composed of Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panamá and the Dominican Republic, that works to foster closer ties and integration across Central America and the Dominican Republic to promote peace, liberty, democracy and development in the region.
India’s ability to ensure affordable, clean and reliable energy for its growing population will be vital for the future development of its economy, but avoiding the kind of carbon-intensive path previously followed by other countries will require strong policies, technological leaps and a surge in clean energy investment, according to a new report released today by the International Energy Agency.

The India Energy Outlook 2021 – a special report in the IEA’s World Energy Outlook series – examines the opportunities and challenges faced by the planet’s third-largest energy consuming country as it seeks to recover from the Covid-19 crisis. India is set to experience the largest increase in energy demand of any country worldwide over the next 20 years as its economy continues to develop and bring greater prosperity to its citizens. The combination of a growing and industrialising economy and an expanding and increasingly urban population will drive energy use higher, raising the question of how best to meet that swelling demand without exacerbating issues like costly energy imports, air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions.

“India has made remarkable progress in recent years, bringing electricity connections to hundreds of millions of people and impressively scaling up the use of renewable energy, particularly solar,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “What our new report makes clear is the tremendous opportunity for India to successfully meet the aspirations of its citizens without following the high-carbon pathway that other economies have pursued in the past. The energy policy successes of the Indian government to date make me very optimistic about its ability to meet the challenges ahead in terms of energy security and sustainability.”

The rapid expansion of solar power combined with smart policy-making are transforming India’s electricity sector, enabling it to provide clean, affordable and reliable power to a growing number of households and businesses, the report finds. However, as is the case in economies around the world, the transport and industrial sectors – areas like road freight, steel and cement – will prove far more challenging to develop in a sustainable manner.

More than that of any other major economy, India’s energy future depends on buildings and factories that are yet to be built, and vehicles and appliances that are yet to be bought. Based on India’s current policy settings, nearly 60% of its CO2 emissions in the late 2030s will be coming from infrastructure and machines that do not exist today. This represents a huge opening for policies to steer India onto a more secure and sustainable course.

If India goes down this path, it would need to address the critical challenge of the industrial sector through efforts like more widespread electrification of processes, greater material and energy efficiency, the use of technologies like carbon capture, and a switch to progressively lower-carbon fuels. Electrification, efficiency and fuel switching are also the main tools for the transport sector, alongside a determined move to build more sustainable infrastructure and shift more freight onto India’s soon-to-be-electrified railways.

These transformations – on a scale no country has achieved in history – require huge advances in innovation, strong partnerships and vast amounts of capital. The additional funding for clean energy technologies required to put India on a sustainable path over the next 20 years is $1.4 trillion, or 70%, higher than in a scenario based on its current policy settings. But the benefits are huge, including savings of the same magnitude on oil import bills.

India faces a range of evolving energy security challenges. Based on today’s policy settings, India’s combined import bill for fossil fuels is projected to triple over the next two decades, with oil by far the largest component. Domestic production of oil and gas continues to fall behind consumption trends and net dependence on imported oil rises above 90% by 2040, up from 75% today. This continued reliance on imported fuels creates vulnerabilities to price cycles and volatility, as well as possible disruptions to supply. Energy security hazards could arise in India’s domestic market as well, notably in the electricity sector in the absence of significant increases in system flexibility, improvements to the financial health of many electricity distribution companies, and other reform efforts.

“Government policies to accelerate India’s clean energy transition can lay the foundation for lasting prosperity and greater energy security. The stakes could not be higher, for India and for the world,” said Dr Birol. “All roads to successful global clean energy transitions go via India.”

“The IEA is committed to supporting India as it makes its sovereign choices on how to build a brighter energy future,” he added. “We are fortunate to have a close working relationship, which is growing stronger by the day thanks to the recent historic decision by the Government of India and IEA members to enter into a Strategic Partnership less than four years after India joined the IEA family as an Association country. This new major milestone could eventually lead to full IEA membership for India, which would be a game-changing moment for global energy governance.”
The Energy Research Office (EPE), which supports Brazil’s Ministry of Mines and Energy through studies and research on energy planning, today released its Atlas of Energy Efficiency in Brazil 2020 – Indicators Report. The study tracks progress on energy efficiency in key sectors of the country's economy. This is the EPE’s fourth dedicated energy efficiency monitoring report.

This year, a chapter jointly authored by the IEA and the EPE places a special focus on the impacts of the Covid-19 crisis in 2020. It explores behaviour changes in transport and households, as well as the impact of the pandemic on energy efficiency jobs.

Key takeaways include the importance of transport modes like walking and cycling to counteract the impacts on air quality and traffic congestion from the rise in car travel – as well as a reminder of the continuing benefits of public transport. Ensuring that appliance labels are visible for online purchases is also increasingly important so that customers can make informed decisions on appliance efficiency with the growth in online shopping. Finally, it is clear that the Covid-19 crisis has hit employment in sectors such as construction where many energy efficiency jobs are concentrated. Here, there is an opportunity to build on existing efficiency programmes to expand jobs in the sector in line with the key findings in IEA’s Special Report on Sustainable Recovery.

The cement sector is one of the highest-emitting sectors worldwide and is the focus of the chapter co-authored by the IEA, the EPE and the Brazilian National Union for the Cement Industry (SNIC). This chapter explores the evolution of Brazil’s cement sector since the 1970s, with a particular focus on energy efficiency and carbon emissions. Key highlights include an analysis of how Brazil has modernised its cement industry to become a global leader, and opportunities for further efficiency gains and emissions reductions.

This is the second year that the IEA has cooperated with the EPE on the Atlas of Energy Efficiency. It demonstrates the opportunities that continued cooperation can provide to advance energy efficiency for the benefit of citizens and the economy. The IEA looks forward to continuing to collaborate with Brazil, which is a key part of the IEA family and valued partner in the Agency’s Clean Energy Transitions Programme.
While France and a growing number of countries around the world have been setting ambitious goals for reaching net-zero emissions, variable renewables like wind and solar energy are set to become the main building blocks in power systems worldwide as countries seek to decarbonise their economies. In a new joint analysis commissioned by the French Ministry for the Ecological Transition, the IEA (International Energy Agency) and RTE (Réseau de Transport d’Electricité) describe four essential areas that policy makers must address when wind and solar PV start to dominate electricity generation.

The new report, Conditions and requirements for the technical feasibility of a power system with a high share of renewables in France towards 2050, outlines four groups of strict conditions that need to be met to integrate very high shares of renewables in a technically secure way in a large and meshed power system such as that of France.

Power system strength : Even if they still need to be proven at large scale, there is a general scientific consensus that technological solutions to maintain system strength – and therefore stability – without conventional generation exist in several cases. Specific difficulties are expected in the case of a system with a significant share of distributed solar PV. Further assessment of the impacts of distributed PV on the power distribution network and their implications for electricity security is needed.

: Even if they still need to be proven at large scale, there is a general scientific consensus that technological solutions to maintain system strength – and therefore stability – without conventional generation exist in several cases. Specific difficulties are expected in the case of a system with a significant share of distributed solar PV. Further assessment of the impacts of distributed PV on the power distribution network and their implications for electricity security is needed. System adequacy: This is the ability of a power system to cope with a given load at all times. It can be ensured even in a system mainly based on variable renewables as long as substantial sources of flexibility are available, including demand-response, large-scale storage, peak generation units and well-developed transmission networks and interconnections. The maturity, availability and cost of different flexibility mixes need to be evaluated in further analysis.

This is the ability of a power system to cope with a given load at all times. It can be ensured even in a system mainly based on variable renewables as long as substantial sources of flexibility are available, including demand-response, large-scale storage, peak generation units and well-developed transmission networks and interconnections. The maturity, availability and cost of different flexibility mixes need to be evaluated in further analysis. Operational reserves : The sizing of these reserves and the regulatory framework for balancing responsibilities and procurement would need to be substantially revised in a large power system as such that of France. Moreover, forecasting methods for variable renewables would need to be continually improved.

: The sizing of these reserves and the regulatory framework for balancing responsibilities and procurement would need to be substantially revised in a large power system as such that of France. Moreover, forecasting methods for variable renewables would need to be continually improved. Grid development: Substantial efforts would be necessary beyond 2030 at both transmission and distribution levels. This requires strong proactive steps and public engagement in long-term planning in order to assess costs and work with citizens on social acceptance of new infrastructure. These efforts can nonetheless be partly integrated into the renewal of ageing network assets.

Xavier Piechaczyk, President of the Managing Board of RTE: “France has committed itself to carbon neutrality by 2050. All the national scenarios foresee more carbon-free electricity and significant volumes of renewable energy by then. While there are no insurmountable technical barriers, to move towards a mix with very high shares of variable renewable energy, you have to look at the scientific, technical and industrial factors: there are still many topics to address. The report suggests a method and roadmaps to tackle these issues.”

Dr Fatih Birol, Executive Director of the IEA: “Many governments around the world are putting net-zero commitments including the European Union, Japan, the UK, and soon the US and China. And if we want to reach these targets, higher renewables is essential, including in France, where the combined share of solar and wind is around 10 percent of the electricity mix today, and where there is a huge room for improvement. Our report looks at the technical implications of this, and how France can be a low-carbon energy champion and build its energy system for tomorrow.”

The joint study marks an important step and is part of a larger work program aimed at developing and comparing scenarios for the long-term transformation of the electricity system to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050. On 27 January 2021, RTE will open a public consultation assessing the framework and assumptions of these future scenarios, and will present the conclusions of this consultation in the Fall 2021. (More information can be found on RTE’s website.)
Less than four years after the International Energy Agency welcomed India as an Association country, IEA members and the Government of India today agreed to enter into a Strategic Partnership, strengthening their collaboration across a range of vital areas including energy security and clean energy transitions. The signing of the Framework marked a major milestone in global energy governance that could lead to eventual IEA membership for India.

The IEA and India signed the Strategic Partnership Framework during a virtual ceremony, with senior representatives from India and IEA Members in attendance. Participants included Ambassador Hiroshi Oe of Japan, the Chair of the IEA Governing Board, and Ambassador Jawed Ashraf of India. The Framework was signed by Mr Sanjiv Nandan Sahai, Secretary of the Ministry of Power, representing India, and Dr Fatih Birol, IEA Executive Director, on behalf of the Agency’s members.

“Today is a historic day. The signing of this agreement reaffirms and advances the invaluable relationship that IEA members and India have,” said Mr Sahai. “Under the framework of this newly formed alliance, we will establish with the IEA the key steps for enhancing energy security and substantive cooperation across the full spectrum of IEA activities. We hope this partnership leads to an extensive exchange of knowledge and can be a stepping stone towards India becoming a full member of the IEA."

“India will have a critical role in shaping the world’s energy and climate future. As the leading global authority on clean energy transitions, the IEA is the perfect partner to support India as it expands and improves its energy system for the benefit of its 1.4 billion citizens,” said Dr Birol. “I believe this Strategic Partnership is the natural next step for India and the IEA that could eventually lead to full membership. We’re delighted to be further strengthening our work with India to help it pursue a secure and sustainable path forward, and look forward to working closely with the Government of India to develop and coordinate the contents of the Strategic Partnership."

The Strategic Partnership Framework represents a new phase in the relationship between the IEA and India, the world’s third-largest energy consumer, making it the first IEA Association country to take a formal step to further advance ties with the Agency. A number of IEA members expressed their support for the big step forward.

“This signing ceremony marks a milestone of deepening the successful cooperation between India and the IEA,” said Mr Anders Ygeman, Sweden’s Minister for Energy and Digital Development. “Together we can achieve necessary changes for a green, sustainable and inclusive energy transition globally. Sweden greatly values this deepened cooperation and I look forward continuing working with my Indian colleagues.”

“My deepest congratulations on the signature of the Framework for a Strategic Partnership between the International Energy Agency and the Government of India,” said Mr Hiroshi Kajiyama, Japan’s Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry. “It is important to strengthen the collaborative relationship between the International Energy Agency and the Government of India in order to ensure world energy security and to expedite clean energy transitions, so we welcome the signing of this framework.”

India joined the IEA Family as an Association country in 2017, an act marked by a ceremony in New Delhi with Mr Piyush Goyal, then Minister for Power, Coal, New and Renewable Energy and Mines; and Mr Dharmendra Pradhan, Minister for Petroleum and Natural Gas; and the IEA’s Dr Birol.

India is becoming increasingly influential in global energy trends. According to the IEA’s in-depth report on India’s energy policies, which was released in January 2020, the country’s demand for energy is set to grow rapidly in the coming decades, with electricity use set to increase particularly fast. The country's reliance on fuel imports makes further improving energy security a key priority for the Indian economy.

“With India’s increasing involvement, the IEA is able to more fully represent global energy users and producers,” said Mr Angus Taylor, Australia’s Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction. “I applaud the commitment demonstrated by the Government of India in taking significant steps, not only to shore up their own domestic security but to also identify ways in which they can contribute to global energy security.”

Italy also offered its congratulations to the IEA and India. “In a time when we face global key challenges, such as energy transition and the fight against climate change, we sincerely appreciate the strengthening and enhancing of the cooperation with India, a key partner for the IEA and for all of us members of the Agency,” said Mr Luigi Di Maio, Italy’s Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation. “As the current holder of the G20 Presidency and as partner of the UK in the COP26, Italy is committed to a sustainable, resilient and clean energy future, and I am sure that the Strategic Partnership with India will be a valuable asset in our common endeavour.”

Today, the IEA and India cooperate on a wide-variety of topics, including the expansion of renewables, energy efficiency, the energy-environment nexus, oil stocks and emergency preparedness, data, investment and innovation. The IEA also regularly provides detailed analysis of India’s energy sector, such as a recent deep dive on decarbonising the iron and steel sector, and an upcoming World Energy Outlook special report on India.

“Enhanced cooperation between India and the IEA will largely contribute to promoting development in various areas including global energy security, global energy governance and the use of sustainable energy resources,” said Mr Toshimitsu Motegi, Japan’s Minister of Foreign Affairs. “We look forward to the progress of the discussion between India and the IEA on the concrete cooperation. Japan will actively contribute to further enhancing the existing cooperative relations between India and the IEA.”

“The agreement between the IEA and India to pursue a Strategic Partnership is a major step towards building a sustainable, secure and prosperous energy future globally. By joining forces even closer with India in addressing the energy and climate challenges of the future, we also tap into a great potential for innovation and sustainable growth for all partners involved,” said Mr Peter Altmaier, Germany’s Minister for Economic Affairs and Energy.

“As one of the world’s largest energy consumers with the outlook for unparalleled growth, India’s addition to the IEA family will further reinforce the solid stature and significant influence of the IEA, while extending the reach of many aspects of its work, including on energy security, electricity access and natural gas markets,” said Mr Seamus O’Regan, Canada’s Minister of Natural Resources. “It will also serve to strengthen the agency’s reach in the context of its Clean Energy Transitions Programme.”

Starting in 2015, the IEA has been opening its doors to major emerging economies that are at the centre of the global conversation on energy. Since then, eight countries have joined the IEA’s Association programme: Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Morocco, Singapore, South Africa and Thailand. Along with the IEA’s 30 members and the three countries formally seeking accession, this expanded IEA Family now represents 75% of global energy demand, up from 40% in 2015.

The IEA was founded in 1974 by industrialised countries – within the framework of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) – in response to the oil embargo. As a result, countries seeking to become members of the IEA must also be members of the OECD and ensure they hold total oil stocks equivalent to at least 90 days of net oil imports. But over the years, the IEA’s mission has expanded substantially and today the agency is working with major economies around the world to enhance energy security and to help accelerate their clean energy transitions.
Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen of Denmark will head a new high-level global commission that will examine ways to ensure people are at the centre of clean energy transitions around the world.

The new initiative – Our Inclusive Energy Future: The Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions – was convened by Dr Fatih Birol, the International Energy Agency’s Executive Director, and will be chaired by Dan Jørgensen, Denmark’s Minister of Climate, Energy and Utilities. Prime Minister Frederiksen will be the honorary patron.

The commission’s members will include Prime Minister Mark Phillips of Guyana; Teresa Ribera, Vice President and Minister for the Ecological Transition of Spain; Seamus O'Regan, Minister of Natural Resources of Canada; Arifin Tasrif, Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources of Indonesia; Rocío Nahle García, Secretary of Energy of Mexico; and Sophie Gladima, Minister of Petroleum and Energy of Senegal. The full list of members to date is available below. The commission will provide key recommendations based on its work ahead of COP26 in November.

As countries seek to advance their shifts to clean energy technologies, the success of these efforts will rest on enabling citizens to benefit from the opportunities and navigate the disruptions. This includes social and economic impacts on individuals and communities, as well as issues of affordability and fairness.

The new commission will explore these questions in depth, taking into account the need to see people as active participants in clean energy transitions – in collective decision-making and through individual actions and behaviours. Equity and inclusion issues will also be examined, including gender equality.

“Clean energy transitions are gaining significant momentum around the world, and it is essential to their success that they be inclusive and centred around people,” said Dr Birol. “Many countries are now focusing on this issue and seeking opportunities to exchange ideas and advice. The high-level members of our Global Commission on People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions will lead a global dialogue to share experiences and enhance best practice.”

“Denmark has already shown clear global leadership on this issue, and that is why I am delighted and honoured that Prime Minister Frederiksen has agreed to be the Honorary Patron of the Commission and that Minister Jørgensen has agreed to chair it,” Dr Birol added.

“I am very pleased to see that the IEA, under the leadership of Dr Fatih Birol, has been strengthening its focus on green energy transition and now on just transition. Therefore, I am proud to lead the work in this new global commission and thereby help to ensure a just transition to more renewable energy around the world. International collaboration as well as social fairness is at the heart of the Danish government,” said Mr Jørgensen.

“This new commission is an important contribution to secure an inclusive global energy system and putting people at the heart of clean energy transitions. We have to act now to fight the climate changes, but we will only succeed if we are able to inspire and include people in a socially balanced way,” Mr Jørgensen added.

Additional members of the commission are expected to be announced soon.
Methane emissions from the global oil and gas industry fell by an estimated 10% in 2020 as producers slashed output in response to the historic shock of the Covid-19 crisis, the International Energy Agency said today, warning that these emissions could rebound strongly without greater action by companies, policy makers and regulators.

Methane is a much more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide (CO2) and makes a major contribution to global warming. According to the IEA’s 2021 update of its Methane Tracker, oil and gas operations worldwide emitted more than 70 million tonnes of methane into the atmosphere last year. This is broadly equivalent to the total energy-related CO2 emissions from the entire European Union.

The new IEA analysis indicates that a large part of the drop in methane emissions in 2020 occurred not because companies were taking more care to avoid methane leaks from their operations, but simply because they were producing less oil and gas. As such, there is clearly a risk that this downward trend will be reversed by an increase in production to fuel a rebound in global economic activity.

“The immediate task now for the oil and gas industry is to make sure that there is no resurgence in methane emissions, even as the world economy recovers, and that 2019 becomes their historical peak. There is no good reason to allow these harmful leaks to continue, and there is every reason for responsible operators to ensure that they are addressed,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director.

“Alongside ambitious efforts to decarbonise our economies, early action on methane emissions will be critical for avoiding the worst effects of climate change. There has never been a greater sense of urgency about this issue than there is today, said Dr Birol. “To help accelerate these efforts, the IEA is today releasing a ‘how-to’ guide that governments and regulators can use to bring down methane emissions from oil and gas operations.”

IEA analysis highlights that reducing methane emissions is very cost-effective for oil and gas companies. Unlike CO2, there is already a price for methane everywhere in the world – the price of natural gas. This means the costs of improving operations or making repairs to prevent leaks can often be paid for by the value of the additional gas that is brought to market.

“We believe that industry must act, visibly and quickly,” Dr Birol said. “But there is also a strong role for government policies; to incentivise early action by companies, push for transparency and improvements in performance, and support innovation in getting results.”

The new IEA report, Driving Down Methane Leaks from the Oil and Gas Industry: A Regulatory Roadmap and Toolkit, offers a step-by-step guide for anyone trying develop or to update regulation on methane. Its advice draws on analysis of how more than 50 countries, states or provinces – from the United States to Nigeria, from Iraq to China and Russia – have tackled methane emissions from a regulatory perspective.

“In this crucial year for climate action leading up to COP26 in Glasgow in November, this is the moment for governments to raise ambitions not only on CO2 but also on methane,” Dr Birol said. “One important avenue, especially for countries with large oil and gas sectors, will be to include commitments on methane in their new or updated pledges in advance of the COP meeting. This is also the moment for companies to put all their weight behind this effort.”

The case for action is not just environmental or reputational. There are increasing signs that consumers are starting to look carefully at the emissions profile of different sources of gas when making decisions on what to buy. A gas producer without a credible story on methane abatement is also one that is taking commercial risks.
Prominent energy figures from around the world took part in a virtual dialogue last month on ways to accelerate progress on diversity and inclusion in energy. The event was co-hosted by Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director; Ambassador Madeleine Chenette, the Permanent Representative of Canada to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD); and the Clean Energy, Education and Empowerment International Initiative (C3E International).

The C3E International Initiative, under the IEA Technology Collaboration Programme and the Clean Energy Ministerial, aims to enable greater gender diversity in clean energy professions, recognising that transitions to a clean energy future will need to harness all possible talent to succeed.

Participants from across the energy sector took part in the event on 2 December 2020 to share perspectives and insights on what really matters in the industry. Dr Birol emphasised that diversity and inclusion were priorities for his modernisation agenda for the IEA because “decision-making benefits from the strength of diverse perspectives.” He noted that the share of women in leadership positions at the IEA had grown from 16% in 2015 to 38% today. Dr Birol said he was “delighted that the virtual dialogue represented voices from across the IEA family, reflecting the ‘all fuels and all technologies’ approach of the Agency.”

Highlighting that women’s participation and representation in the energy sector is far below those in other comparable sectors, Ambassador Chenette set out the moral, political and strategic imperatives for accelerating progress. She emphasised that both high-level and personal leadership are critical for overcoming slow progress, and thanked Dr Birol for his leadership in emphasising the need to make economic recoveries from the Covid-19 crisis sustainable.

Empowering women in clean energy transitions is one way to help achieve sustainable recoveries, Ambassador Chenette said, calling for greater efforts to embrace the principle of “what gets meseaured, gets done.” She noted that “it is crucial that we all recognise the economic, environmental and social benefits that gender equality delivers.”
The International Energy Agency today announced that it will produce the world’s first comprehensive roadmap for the energy sector to reach net-zero emissions by 2050 as it further strengthens its leadership role in global clean energy transitions.

The new special report, The World’s Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050, will set out in detail what is needed from governments, companies, investors and citizens to fully decarbonise the energy sector and put emissions on a path in line with a temperature rise of 1.5 degrees Celsius. It is part of a series of new IEA projects to support efforts to reach global energy and climate goals.

This new roadmap will be released on 18 May and build momentum ahead of the COP26 Summit in Glasgow in November, under the presidency of the United Kingdom.

Dozens of countries – including most of the world’s largest economies – and many leading companies have already announced plans to bring their emissions down to zero by around the middle of this century. But much work remains to be done to translate these ambitious targets into actual reductions in emissions.

“The energy that powers our daily lives and our economies also produces three-quarters of global emissions. This means our climate challenge is essentially an energy challenge. The IEA is determined to tackle that challenge and lead global clean energy transitions,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director.

“Our roadmap to net zero can play a vital role in helping countries identify and implement the actions needed to achieve climate, energy security and affordability goals. Nothing short of a total transformation of our energy infrastructure will be required. That calls for decisive action this year, next year and indeed every year to 2050,” Dr Birol said.

COP26 President Alok Sharma said: "The IEA’s plan to produce a pathway to net zero global emissions by 2050 is another important step for climate action. This will make clear the actions countries must take individually and collectively to meet that goal.”

Driving a stronger global consensus on the pathway to net zero will be a key priority for the IEA over the coming years. The Agency also intends to step up its work on global clean energy transitions in other major areas through 2021 and beyond. It will expand efforts to support its members and partners in meeting their climate ambitions, and play a greater role in tracking national commitments. This includes working with governments to develop stronger mechanisms that build confidence that they are not alone in taking the necessary steps to keep their climate promises.

The IEA also announced that reinvigorating international energy cooperation will be a major theme of the 2nd IEA Clean Energy Transitions Summit, following the first event held last year. This year’s Summit will be co-hosted with the UK Government on 31 March and will focus on how governments can work together more effectively to ensure long-term net-zero targets are translated into concrete action in the run up to COP26.

"International collaboration is at the heart of the UK’s COP26 Presidency, and I am proud that the UK Government will co-host the COP26-IEA Clean Energy Transitions Summit to help accelerate the global shift to clean, affordable and resilient energy," said Mr Sharma, the COP26 President.

In parallel, the IEA will continue to support a secure and inclusive global energy system. It announced today a new high-level global commission headed by Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen of Denmark that will bring together government leaders, ministers and prominent thinkers to explore how best to empower citizens to benefit from the opportunities and navigate the disruptions resulting from clean energy transitions.

The new commission, Our Inclusive Energy Future, will consider the social and economic impacts on individuals and communities, as well as issues of affordability and fairness, with the aim of putting people at the heart of clean energy transitions. The commission’s meetings will be chaired by Danish Energy, Climate and Utilities Minister Dan Jørgensen and result in key recommendations in advance of COP26.

The IEA’s special projects for 2021 also include the release next week of new global data on emissions of methane, a potent greenhouse gas, along with a detailed guide for policy makers and regulators seeking to increase their ambitions to cut those emissions. To help ensure countries and companies are well prepared to accelerate the deployment of new technologies, the IEA will produce a new special report in April on The Role of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions.

The IEA remains committed to deepening its engagement with major emerging economies – such as Brazil, China, India, Indonesia and South Africa – and supporting them in their efforts to develop and implement policies to reach their energy and climate goals. To help ensure that clean energy technologies are available to all countries, the Agency will also publish a special report on Financing Clean Energy Transitions in Developing Economies, which will be produced in collaboration with the World Bank and the World Economic Forum (WEF) and released at the WEF’s Special Annual Meeting 2021 in Singapore in late May.

“Taken together, the projects we are announcing today reflect our commitment to lead the global clean energy transitions at a critical time, and make sure we can address the challenge of climate change with sustainable, resilient and secure energy systems,” said Dr Birol.
A global economic recovery in 2021 is expected to drive a short-lived rebound in coal demand following the major drop this year triggered by the Covid-19 crisis, according to a new report from the International Energy Agency.

However, there is little sign that the world’s coal consumption is set to decline substantially in the coming years, with rising demand in some Asian economies offsetting declines elsewhere. As coal is by far the single largest source of global energy-related carbon emissions, the trends outlined in the report pose a major challenge to efforts to put those emissions on a path compatible with reaching climate and sustainable energy goals.

The past two years have seen historic falls in global coal demand, led by unprecedented drops in the United States and Europe, says Coal 2020, the latest edition of the IEA’s annual market report on the sector. A 1.8% decline in coal demand in 2019 resulted mainly from weak growth in electricity demand and low natural gas prices. Latest estimates from the IEA suggest coal demand will have plunged by a further 5% in 2020 on the economic fallout from Covid-19.

“The Covid-19 crisis has completely reshaped global coal markets. Before the pandemic, we expected a small rebound in coal demand in 2020, but we have since witnessed the largest drop in coal consumption since the Second World War,” said Keisuke Sadamori, the IEA’s Director of Energy Markets and Security. “The decline would have been even steeper without the strong economic rebound in China – the world’s largest coal consumer – in the second half of the year.”

Based on the assumption of a recovery in the world economy, the IEA report forecasts a 2.6% rise in global coal demand in 2021, driven by higher electricity demand and industrial output. China, India and Southeast Asian economies account for most of the growth, although the United States and Europe may also both see their first increases in coal consumption in nearly a decade. However, global coal demand in 2021 is still forecast to remain below 2019 levels and could be even lower if the report’s assumptions for the economic recovery, electricity demand or natural gas prices are not met.

The rebound in coal demand in 2021 is set to be short-lived, with coal use forecast to flatten out by 2025 at around 7.4 billion tonnes. This would make 2013, when global coal demand reached 8 billion tonnes, coal’s all-time peak. But while coal’s share in both the electricity mix and the overall energy mix are in steady decline, coal use in absolute terms is not set for a rapid decline in the immediate future.

“Renewables are on track to surpass coal as the largest source of electricity in the world by 2025. And by that time, natural gas will likely have taken over coal as the second largest source of primary energy after oil,” said Mr Sadamori. “But with coal demand still expected to remain steady or to grow in key Asian economies, there is no sign that coal is going to fade away quickly.”

The future of coal will largely be decided in Asia. Today, China and India account for 65% of global coal demand. With Japan, Korea, Taiwan and Southeast Asia included, that share rises to 75%. China, which currently accounts for half of the world’s coal consumption, will be especially influential. By 2025, the European Union and United States will account for less than 10% of global coal demand, down from 37% in 2000. This will make the impacts of any further changes in demand in these markets very limited.
After experiencing its biggest decline in decades, global electricity demand is expected to rebound modestly next year, led by growth in China, India and other emerging economies, according to a new report by the International Energy Agency.

The historic shock of the Covid-19 crisis is set to result in a 2% decline in global electricity demand in 2020, according to the IEA’s first ever Electricity Market Report, which was published today. With the recovery of the world economy in 2021, electricity demand is forecast to grow by around 3%. That would be significantly weaker than the rebound in demand of over 7% in 2010, the year following the global financial crisis. China will be the only major economy to see higher electricity demand in 2020. However, its expected growth of around 2% is well below its recent average of 6.5%. Other big electricity consumers including the United States, India, Europe, Japan, Korea and Southeast Asia are all set to experience declines for the year as a whole.

Electricity generation from renewable energy – such as hydropower, wind and solar – is forecast to grow by almost 7% in 2020, squeezing conventional power sources. Coal-fired generation is set to fall by around 5%, the largest decrease on record; nuclear power generation by around 4%; and gas-fired electricity generation by 2%. Overall, CO2 emissions from electricity generation are on course to fall by 5% in 2020.

“Electricity has a central role in today’s energy world – a role that will only increase in importance as clean energy transitions accelerate,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director. “Based on the very latest data available, the IEA’s new Electricity Market Report provides fresh insights on this critical sector. Starting next year, we will publish a new edition of the report on a half-yearly basis.”

Falling demand, lower fuel prices and the increase in renewable generation have dragged down wholesale electricity prices in 2020. The IEA’s wholesale electricity market price index, which tracks price movements in major advanced economies, shows an average price decline of 28% this year, after having already fallen by 12% in 2019.

The growth of renewable power generation is forecast to continue in 2021 with an increase of more than 6%, expanding the share of renewables in the power mix to 29% from 28% in 2020. Nuclear power is set for growth of 2.5% next year on rebounds in France and Japan and new plants coming online in China and the United Arab Emirates.

In advanced economies, the growth of renewables and nuclear power will continue to shrink the space remaining for fossil fuel generation. Natural gas is likely to be impacted more than coal as a result of an expected rise in natural gas prices. In emerging and developing economies, demand growth is forecast to outpace increases in renewables and nuclear power, leaving some room for coal and gas generation to expand.

The expected net result globally is that coal-fired generation increases by around 3% in 2021, while gas-fired plants increase output by roughly 1%. This would lead to a rise in CO2 emissions from the power sector of around 2% in 2021.
The levelised costs of electricity generation of low‑carbon generation technologies are falling and are increasingly below the costs of conventional fossil fuel generation, finds the 2020 edition of the Projected Costs of Generating Electricity. It is the ninth report in the series on the levelised costs of electricity (LCOE) jointly prepared every five years by the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) and the International Energy (IEA). With the analysis of 243 plants based on data from 24 countries, the report presents the plant‑level costs of generating electricity for baseload electricity generated from fossil fuel, nuclear energy and a range of renewable technologies, such as wind and solar, hydro and biofuels.

Despite differences in regional, national and local conditions, the report finds that low‑carbon generation is overall becoming increasingly cost competitive. Renewable energy costs have continued to decrease in recent years and the costs of wind and solar PV are now competitive with fossil fuel‑based electricity generation in many countries. Electricity from nuclear power plants is also expected to have lower costs in the near future. Due to cost reductions stemming from the lessons learnt from first‑of‑a‑kind projects in several OECD countries, new nuclear power will remain the dispatchable low‑carbon technology with the lowest expected costs in 2025. The report also finds that prolonging the operation of existing nuclear power plants, known as long‑term operation (LTO), is the most cost‑effective source of low carbon electricity. Hydroelectric power can provide a similar contribution at comparable costs, however remains highly dependent on the natural endowments of individual countries.

As has been demonstrated by the ongoing COVID‑19 pandemic, access to electricity is key to advanced societies," said NEA Director General William D. Magwood, IV. "Reliable and cost‑effective electricity is the source of economic growth in both developed and developing countries that face the need to bring more people out of poverty, to provide healthcare and to educate future generations."

As in previous editions, the report uses the LCOE methodology as a well‑established and widely‑used metric in policy making and modelling. However, for the first time the report also presents a new complementary metric, the "value‑adjusted" LCOE measure in order to account for the increasing importance of system considerations within the context of the growing share of variable renewable energy (VRE) technologies. Costs associated with storage, fuel cells and the long‑term operation (LTO) of nuclear power plants are also included in the analysis for the first time. In addition, the report includes five "boundary chapters", free‑standing articles contributed by experts in the respective areas that discuss different aspects of current and future electricity systems.

Also for the first time, the report is also accompanied by an online Levelised Cost of Electricity Calculator. The calculator allows for easy download of all data tables in the report, and empowers the user to examine the impact of changing select variables, such as the discount rate, fuel prices or the cost of carbon. These improvements will make the report's information easier to access and help users explore the sensitivity of results to certain key variables.

"The electricity sector is essential for the functioning of modern societies, as the COVID‑19 crisis has highlighted yet again, and also has a crucial role to play in reducing global emissions." said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. "Investing in affordable low‑carbon electricity generation technologies supports economic growth but is also necessary if we are to put global emissions into structural decline."

"All countries have the right and responsibility to do what they think is right for their citizens," added NEA Director‑General Magwood. "But decarbonisation commitments made as part of post‑COVID‑19 economic recovery must be approached with a full understanding of the costs & impacts of various technologies in the electricity system as a whole. From an economic and sustainable standpoint, it is crucial to have the right balance of variable renewables and dispatchable resources, such as nuclear and hydro, in order to enable a resilient long-term energy infrastructure."
Energy efficiency and its multiple benefits are key for clean energy transitions, supporting countries in their efforts to meet climate goals and increase access to energy services. Governments are stepping up energy efficiency policy efforts, setting more ambitious targets and measures such as minimum energy performance standards.

However, commonly used indicators such as energy intensity are not specific enough to deeply evaluate the role of energy efficiency. This is because this kind of aggregated indicator is determined by many additional factors unrelated to energy efficiency, including economic structure, type of industrial base, exchange rate, affordability of energy services, country size, climate and behaviour. By using disaggregated data in a decomposition analysis it is possible to isolate the impact of energy efficiency and of such factors on total energy consumption.

To support this kind of analysis, the IEA’s Energy Efficiency Indicators Database provides disaggregated energy consumption, emissions and activity data by sub-sector and/or by end use at a country level. The latest database update released today in parallel with the launch of Energy Efficiency 2020 includes annual data from 2000 to 2018 and expanded geographical coverage.

The Energy Efficiency Indicators Database supports countries in their efforts to track efficiency improvements across sectors and end uses – and to create and evaluate energy efficiency policies. The IEA stands ready to build upon this and other existing efforts with countries around the world to collect end-use data and develop energy efficiency indicators.
The already sluggish pace of global progress on energy efficiency is set to slow further this year as a result of the economic impacts of the Covid-19 crisis, deepening the challenge of reaching international energy and climate goals and making stronger government action critical, according to a new report by the International Energy Agency.

Global primary energy intensity – a key indicator of how efficiently the world’s economic activity uses energy – is expected to improve by less than 1% this year, the weakest rate since 2010, according to Energy Efficiency 2020, the latest edition the IEA’s annual update on efficiency trends. This is well below the level of progress needed to achieve the world’s shared goals for addressing climate change, reducing air pollution and increasing access to energy.

The disappointing trends are being exacerbated by a plunge in investments in energy-efficient buildings, equipment and vehicles amid the economic crisis triggered by the pandemic, the report finds. Purchases of new cars, which are more efficient than older models, have slowed, while construction of new, more efficient homes and other buildings is also expected to decelerate. In industry and commercial buildings, lower energy prices have extended payback periods for key efficiency measures by as much as 40%, reducing their attractiveness compared with other investments. Overall, investment in energy efficiency worldwide is on course to fall by 9% in 2020.

“Together with renewables, energy efficiency is one of the mainstays of global efforts to reach energy and climate goals. While our recent analysis shows encouraging momentum for renewables, I’m very concerned that improvements in global energy efficiency are now at their slowest rate in a decade,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the Executive Director of the IEA. “For governments that are serious about boosting energy efficiency, the litmus test will be the amount of resources they devote to it in their economic recovery packages, where efficiency measures can help drive economic growth and job creation.”

Improvements in energy efficiency can contribute around half of the reduction in energy-related greenhouse gas emissions that is required over the next two decades to put the world on a path to meeting international energy and climate goals, according to IEA analysis. But short-term trends resulting from the Covid-19 crisis are slowing improvements in the energy intensity of the global economy, meaning that every unit of economic output uses more energy than it would do otherwise. This is mainly because energy-intensive industries, such as metals manufacturing and chemicals, appear to have been less severely affected by the crisis than other, less intensive parts of the economy.

The stimulus packages governments are introducing as part of their economic recovery plans will heavily influence future efficiency trends. They have the potential to drive investments and structural changes that can reduce energy intensity across all sectors of the economy. More than 60% of the funding for energy efficiency-related measures in stimulus packages announced by governments to date has focused on either the buildings sector or on accelerating the shift to electric vehicles, including new vehicle charging infrastructure.

Many opportunities remain untapped, however, with IEA tracking revealing a spending imbalance across sectors. No announcements have been made to increase the penetration of super-efficient appliances, while spending on vehicle efficiency beyond electric vehicles is minimal to date. The planned spending is also imbalanced on a regional basis, with announcements from European countries dwarfing those from other parts of the world. Announced spending in Europe accounts for 86% of global public stimulus announcements for efficiency, with the remaining 14% split between the Asia-Pacific region and North America.

“We welcome plans by governments to boost spending on energy efficiency in response to the economic crisis, but what we have seen so far is uneven and far from enough,” said Dr Birol. “Energy efficiency should be at the top of to-do lists for governments pursuing a sustainable recovery – it is a jobs machine, it gets economic activity going, it saves consumers money, it modernises vital infrastructure and it reduces emissions. There’s no excuse not to put far more resources behind it.”

Spending on efficiency-related stimulus measures announced by governments worldwide to date is set to generate almost 2 million full-time jobs between 2021 and 2023, according to IEA analysis, mostly in the buildings sector and mainly in Europe. However, the IEA’s Sustainable Recovery Plan suggests further recovery efforts related to energy efficiency could create another 4 million jobs globally through enhanced public and private sector investment in buildings, transport and industry.
Representatives from countries covering 75% of global energy demand today took part in a multilateral meeting organised by the IEA to discuss key issues such as enhancing international cooperation and accelerating clean energy transitions.

The Multilateral Meeting of IEA Accession, Association and Member Countries took place virtually and was co-chaired by Ambassador Hiroshi Oe of Japan, the Chair of the IEA Governing Board, and Mr Sanjiv Nandan Sahai, Secretary of India’s Ministry of Power.

The meeting brought together representatives of the expanded “IEA Family,” which is made up of its 30 members as well as eight Association countries (Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Morocco, Singapore, South Africa and Thailand) and two countries seeking accession to full membership, Chile and Lithuania.

Thanks to the Agency’s successful policy of opening its doors to emerging economies, the IEA has expanded its role in recent years and is taking a leadership role in guiding partner countries with policies and recommendations for successful and secure clean energy transitions.

At the multilateral meeting today, senior representatives of many of these countries highlighted the benefits that the IEA brings for them, discussed areas where cooperation can be strengthened, and shared thoughts on key elements of their clean energy transitions such as renewable technologies and hydrogen.

“Today’s meeting was another milestone in the development of our cooperation and dialogue in the IEA family. It is clear that Association has been a resounding success, and we should build on this to strengthen our cooperation even further,” said Ambassador Oe. “Also, the accession process has shown progress, and some other countries are showing serious interest in accession. We are moving forward despite the challenges of Covid-19.”

Notably, India and the IEA have been discussing a potential strategic partnership that would enable India to deepen its relationship with the Agency beyond its current status as an Association country.

“India and the IEA have cooperated extensively and substantively over a full spectrum of energy-related initiatives, including the India 2020 Energy Policy Review,” said Mr Sahai. “We are committed to strongly engage with the IEA in the period ahead and hope that all these consultations will help us take this matter forward in a way that is mutually beneficial."

Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director, underlined that the agency is providing critical support to countries with the aim of reducing emissions and speeding up their clean energy transitions.

“No country is an energy island,” said Dr Birol. “We need to learn from each other and share our experiences so we can all benefit. The IEA is an organisation that looks at all fuels and technologies, with a focus on data, analysis and policy recommendations – but also real-world impact. We work directly with major emerging economies to support the development and implementation of key policies and projects that help them pursue their energy and climate goals.”
African ministers from countries making up 70% of Africa’s total primary energy supply, nearly 70% of its GDP and more than half of the continent’s entire population met with global energy leaders via videoconference on 24 November 2020.

A revitalised energy sector is key to Africa’s economic transformation. Participants agreed on the urgent need to enhance actions to ensure sustainable economic recovery and significantly scale up energy investments in Africa over the next three years in the wake of Covid-19.

Discussions highlighted implementation priorities and innovations key to enabling Africa’s energy sector to power regional economic growth over the three-year period (2020-2023) that coincides with end of the first 10-year Action Plan of the AU Agenda 2063. Africa’s pace of progress towards the realisation of the transformative Agenda 2063 continental vision will be determined by the degree to which it successfully recovers from the evolving impacts of the 2020 global health and socioeconomic crisis. African countries must engage in robust, innovative actions to strengthen energy security, scale up infrastructure investment, and promote the growth of the green economy, making use of all available opportunities to continually accelerate Africa’s clean energy transitions. These interventions can be bolstered by enhanced rates of internal trade in Africa, including in the energy sector, through a speedy implementation of the African Continental Free Trade Area.

Ensuring Sustainable Recovery – Participants noted that achievement of full access to modern energy by 2030 is achievable but will require stable, consistent policies and strong political will. They stressed the need for all global stakeholders to maintain focus on collective action, and also update plans to step up the pace of universal access to electricity and modern cooking in Africa. African governments and other partners must continue to work together to ensure progress towards achievement of SDG7 . It was acknowledged that the momentum behind existing policy and investment plans was insufficient to meet the modern energy needs of Africa’s population. It was noted with concern that the initial Covid-19 crisis impact in 2020 had already severely affected recent progress on universal energy access.

Participants noted that achievement of full access to modern energy by 2030 is achievable but will require stable, consistent policies and strong political will. They stressed the need for all global stakeholders to maintain focus on collective action, and also update plans to step up the pace of universal access to electricity and modern cooking in Africa. African governments and other partners must continue to work together to ensure progress towards achievement of SDG7 It was acknowledged that the momentum behind existing policy and investment plans was insufficient to meet the modern energy needs of Africa’s population. It was noted with concern that the initial Covid-19 crisis impact in 2020 had already severely affected recent progress on universal energy access. Financing and Investment – Participants underscored that Africa is facing major challenges in obtaining the required finance and new investments to meet its immense structural transformation needs. Challenges include reduced financing flows, a lack of fiscal space, a slowdown in new investments in the energy sector and significant increases in the cost of borrowing. Oil and gas producers in Africa have been hit very hard throughout 2020, and many new ones have seen their hope for energy sector transformation dashed by the global economic slowdown this year. Local currencies have weakened against hard currencies and this is translating to higher debt burden. The already weak financial position of many African power utilities has been worsened by declining demand due to the pandemic and a high default rate. This situation is further exacerbated by weakened currencies.

Key conclusions – Participants stressed the following top recommendations going forward:

Partnership for a green and just transition is an essential priority to boost sustainable economic recovery in Africa and ensure progress towards universal access to clean energy, whilst ensuring that no one is left behind. In that context, the need to involve more women and youth throughout the value chain of energy projects was also emphasised.

to boost sustainable economic recovery in Africa and ensure progress towards universal access to clean energy, whilst ensuring that no one is left behind. In that context, the need to involve more women and youth throughout the value chain of energy projects was also emphasised. Support for energy sector institutions and particularly power utilities , which are the fulcrum of the sector, is critical against the financial shocks imposed by the Covid-19 pandemic. Predictable policy environments with innovative market regulations help to attract new investment.

, which are the fulcrum of the sector, is critical against the financial shocks imposed by the Covid-19 pandemic. Predictable policy environments with innovative market regulations help to attract new investment. An integrated approach embracing grid, mini-grid and off-grid solutions is required to sustain the momentum for increasing access. In light of the Covid-19 crisis, supportive policies to ensure the sustainability of mini-grid providers need to be replicated across the continent.

to sustain the momentum for increasing access. In light of the Covid-19 crisis, supportive policies to ensure the sustainability of mini-grid providers need to be replicated across the continent. Despite the challenges imposed by Covid-19, governments must avoid the temptation to slow down the pace of energy access and provide the right incentives for the private sector to play a part in the recovery process, leveraging on the productive sector and innovative business models and digitalisation.

and provide the right incentives for the private sector to play a part in the recovery process, leveraging on the productive sector and innovative business models and digitalisation. Enhanced multilateral, regional and international cooperation can play an important role in addressing financing and investment challenges in the post Covid-19 era.

in addressing financing and investment challenges in the post Covid-19 era. Stronger regional integration of electricity markets and infrastructure is a crucial factor in achieving a just energy transition as well as building secure, flexible and reliable power supply in Africa.

as well as building secure, flexible and reliable power supply in Africa. The African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) opens the door to a new era of increased interconnectedness. Continental energy infrastructure programs like PIDA should play significant role to support AfCFTA.

opens the door to a new era of increased interconnectedness. Continental energy infrastructure programs like PIDA should play significant role to support AfCFTA. A strong focus on improving power infrastructure, within and across borders, building up regulation and capacity to support Africa’s power pools and further enable regional electricity markets could all play an instrumental role in improving the financing and investment climate on the continent.

to support Africa’s power pools and further enable regional electricity markets could all play an instrumental role in improving the financing and investment climate on the continent. AUC, IEA and partners should consider forming a Taskforce on climate financing solutions for the African energy community that could present its recommendations at the COP 26 in 2021.

The outcomes of this Ministerial Forum will be shared with African Union and IEA member state leaders, as well as the leaders of international financial institutions and other global decision-makers, business leaders and key stakeholders. In addition, these outcomes will help guide future activities linked to enhancing the strong AUC-IEA partnership and inform the IEA’s continued deepening of its engagement with key decision-makers from governments, the private sector, investors and other leading regional institutions across the continent.

As the co-chairs of this event, we would like to thank all participants for their active engagement and constructive contributions.

Signed,
The successful implementation of the Korean government’s Green New Deal will provide an opportunity to accelerate Korea’s clean energy transition and place the country at the forefront of some of the energy industries of the future, according to a new policy review by the International Energy Agency.

Korea recently set a target of reaching carbon neutrality by 2050 to steer its energy sector away from today’s dominance of fossil fuels and strong dependence on energy imports. To accelerate the transition to low-carbon energy, the government is committed to substantially increasing the share of renewable energy sources in the electricity supply, gradually phasing out coal, significantly improving energy efficiency and fostering the country’s nascent hydrogen industry.

“Many of these measures will help Korea not only to advance its energy transition but also to improve its energy security – a high priority given the country’s limited domestic energy production,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director, who is launching the report today at an online event with Joo Young-joon, Deputy Minister at the Korean Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy. “I welcome Korea’s ambitious carbon-neutrality goal and the initial steps set out in its Green New Deal. The IEA is committed to supporting the government in these vital efforts.”

In 2015, Korea became the first country in Northeast Asia to introduce a nationwide emissions trading system that sets a best practice example for other countries to follow. But more needs to be done to reduce the carbon intensity of Korea’s energy supply, which is above the IEA average because of the high share of coal-fired power generation.

Plans by the government to close aging coal-fired plants reflect growing concerns among the population over climate change and local air pollution. The government can draw on this public support to swiftly introduce its planned environmentally friendly energy tax programme that will complement other policy measures, according to the IEA report.

Korea’s private sector has a high capacity for technology innovation and its population has shown an almost unparalleled openness toward digitalisation. This closely links Korea’s energy transition to efforts to spur investments in energy storage systems, smart grids and intelligent transport systems.

“Korea can draw on its technological expertise by addressing regulatory and institutional barriers in its energy markets and by fostering more active consumer engagement,” Dr Birol said. “This can improve the way the energy markets operate, enhance competition and encourage the emergence of new business models.”

The focus of Korea’s energy transition must go beyond the power sector to target emissions from industry and transport, the IEA policy review says. The industrial sector is emissions-intensive and accounts for over half of Korea’s final energy consumption despite the notable improvement in energy efficiency over the last decade. The IEA review welcomes the new policy emphasis on integrating individual energy efficiency measures as building blocks for smart energy industrial complexes. It will also be important to find a good balance between mandatory and voluntary measures to encourage further energy efficiency improvements in industry.

In the transport sector, Korea has well-established fuel economy standards for passenger vehicles, but progress is currently lagging behind government targets. The IEA applauds the government’s plans to introduce fuel economy standards for heavy goods vehicles, which would put Korea at the forefront of global efforts.

Korea has set ambitious goals for the roll-out of electric mobility and also to establish itself as a leading exporter of hydrogen and fuel cell vehicles by 2040. Those targets and the commitment to research and innovation more broadly are commendable, but Korea also needs to reappraise the role public transport could play in the future, according to the report.
The IEA held the India launch of Energy Technology Perspectives 2020 during a webinar on 19 November 2020. The event was introduced by Dr Fatih Birol, the Executive Director of the IEA and a keynote address was provided by Mr Prakash Javadekar, Honourable Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (and Minister of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).

Minister Javadekar reinforced the Government of India’s commitment to fighting climate change while providing clean and affordable energy to all Indians. Welcoming the new IEA report, Minister Javadekar also reiterated that new technologies will be vital in the future to reduce carbon emissions but those technologies must be accessible, affordable, and appropriate to country contexts.

Dr Birol highlighted that India has moved to the centre of global energy markets due to the Government’s continued success and leadership in energy access, energy efficiency, and renewable energy. Dr Birol also noted that clean energy transitions need to happen in all parts of the energy sector, which will require the development of low emissions technology solutions at commercial scale. He committed the IEA’s ongoing support for India in continuing its move towards a sustainable, secure and affordable energy system.

Dr Timur Gül, Head of the Energy Technology Policy division of the IEA, presented key messages from ETP-2020, noting that transforming the power sector alone would only get the world one-third of the way to net-zero emissions. To reach net-zero emissions, more attention is needed on demand sectors, which are in greater need of a boost in clean energy innovation boost, particularly long distance transport and heavy industry. Due to the significant projected increase in materials demand for infrastructure developments in India, the need to accelerate clean energy innovation to bring low-carbon technology solutions for heavy industries quickly to markets becomes even more critical.

The launch was followed by a high-level panel discussion led by Ms Mechthild Wörsdörfer, IEA Director for Sustainability, Technology and Outlooks, and Dr Renu Swarup, Secretary of the Department of Biotechnology from the Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India. Dr Swarup provided opening remarks, highlighting the importance of linking supply and demand, and connecting technology development with market deployment in the endeavour of accelerating clean energy innovation.

Panellists included Mr Abhay Bakre, Director General of the Bureau of Energy Efficiency, Ministry of Power, Government of India, Dr Ajay Mathur, Director General of The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), Mr Gurdeep Singh, Chairman and Managing Director of NTPC Limited, Dr RK Malhotra, Director General of Federation of Indian Petroleum Industry (FIPI), Mr Mahendra Singhi, President of the Cement Manufacturers Association (CMA), and Managing Director and CEO of Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Limited, Mr Aniruddha Sharma, CEO of Carbon Clean Solutions, and Mr Dilip Chenoy, Secretary-General of Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and Ms Rita Roy Choudhary, Head Energy Division of FICCI.
Ministers from African countries representing nearly three-quarters of the continent’s energy consumption and more than half of its population met with global energy leaders today to consider how to revitalise the African energy sector and enable a sustainable economic recovery after the pandemic.

Under the theme of Securing Africa’s Energy Future in the Wake of Covid-19, the Second AUC-IEA Ministerial Forum was chaired by Dr Fatih Birol, Executive Director of the IEA, Dr Amani Abou-Zeid, African Union Commissioner for Infrastructure and Energy, and Mr Gwede Mantashe, Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy of South Africa.

High-level officials at the virtual Ministerial meeting represented a diverse range of African economies, including Algeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Mali, Morocco, Nigeria, Senegal and many more. Energy leaders from major global economies such as the European Union, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States also took part, along with senior figures from international organisations, companies and civil society.

Recognising the severe impacts of the Covid-19 crisis on African economies and the importance of the energy sector for continued economic development across the continent, participants agreed on the urgent need to enhance actions to ensure sustainable economic recovery and significantly scale up energy investments over the next three years.

Discussions covered areas such as innovation and how to counter the negative effects of the pandemic on efforts to increase the number of people with access to electricity and clean cooking in Africa, with an emphasis on cooperation and collective action. Participants underscored that Africa is facing major challenges in obtaining the financing and new investments it requires to meet its immense structural transformation needs – an essential part of ensuring a resilient and dynamic energy sector that can power a successful economic recovery.

“I’m delighted that so many Ministers and other energy leaders from across Africa and around the world came together today to focus on how Africa can emerge from this crisis with stronger momentum behind the development of its energy sector – notably through clean energy technologies like solar power," said Dr Birol. "I’d like to thank Commissioner Abou-Zeid and Minister Mantashe for the excellent collaboration that resulted in today’s valuable dialogue. I’m sure the insights from our discussions will help inform and enhance the work of the IEA and other organisations that took part."
IEA Executive Director Dr Fatih Birol held a productive meeting on 19 November with Mr Huang Runqiu, Minister of Ecology and Environment of China to discuss how the IEA can support China achieve its energy and climate ambitions, including the goal of reaching carbon neutrality before 2060.

The IEA welcomes the opportunity to support China in its development of an ambitious and realistic roadmap and policies for achieving a peak in emissions before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060. The IEA input is expected to draw on its policy expertise on emissions trading system implementation and critical technologies such as renewables and carbon capture, utilisation and storage.

The Chinese government is currently developing its 14th Five Year Plan, which will shape its economic policies over the first half of the coming decade, which will be a critical period for global efforts to tackle climate change. The new Five Year Plan is set to strengthen previous policies to further reduce CO2 emissions in line with China’s aim of achieving a peak in emissions before 2030. Measures are expected to include accelerating the implementation of a national emissions trading system, ramping up innovation in low-carbon technologies and increasing climate change capacity building.

At the bilateral meeting, Dr Birol underscored that a key challenge for China is to design a roadmap and energy policies that simultaneously put it on a path towards its carbon neutrality goal while also supporting the country’s continued economic development. He noted that the 14th Five Year Plan will be very important not just for China, but also for the world.

Minister Huang highlighted President Xi Jinping of China’s emphasis on the need for green, low-carbon industries, which he views as a necessary component of the high quality economic development that China is pursuing.

The IEA and the Chinese Ministry of Ecology and Environment signed their first Memorandum of Understing on Climate Change Cooperation on July 2018, laying solid foundations for future colloboration. Both organisations have agreed to continue under this framework and work on a wide-range of areas spanning energy development, clean energy transitions and climate change.
IEA Executive Director Dr Fatih Birol spoke today at the 38th Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Ministers on Energy Meeting, sharing the latest insights on the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on global energy markets and underscoring the strong relationship between ASEAN and the IEA.

The ASEAN Ministers on Energy Meeting is one of the most important global energy events, bringing together Ministers from ASEAN’s 10 member states for in-depth discussions on progress towards the region’s energy ambitions.

The IEA has worked closely with ASEAN on energy policy since 2011 when the two organisations signed a Memorandum of Understanding. Their strengthening relationship on energy policy was reflected by ASEAN’s decision to name the IEA as a strategic partner in 2019.

The major economic shock of the Covid-19 crisis has significantly impacted the global energy landscape, raising challenges and concerns for ASEAN member states. At the Ministerial meeting today – which was chaired by Mr Dang Hoang An, Vice Minister of Industry and Trade of Viet Nam – Dr Birol spoke about the scope for ASEAN countries to pursue sustainable economic recoveries from the crisis by putting clean energy at the heart of their policy-making, as outlined in the IEA’s Sustainable Recovery Plan.

In the communiqué from the Ministerial, the ASEAN Ministers expressed appreciation for the IEA’s support and engagement during the Covid-19 pandemic. They noted that the IEA “plays a pivotal role in helping to meet energy security objectives and to accelerate clean energy transitions across the region” and called for a further deepening of the ASEAN-IEA relationship across all fuels and all technologies in order to assist the region in tackling its energy challenges.

Through 2020, the IEA provided valuable support for the development of a power market spanning ASEAN countries, as well as energy policy design and implementation and energy efficiency capacity building across the region. On top of this, the IEA is supporting Viet Nam in a new initiative to mobilise private investment in infrastructure for electricity transmission.

Home to almost 10% the global population, Southeast Asian economies are expected to remain among the fastest growing worldwide. Before the pandemic, the region’s energy demand was increasing by about 7% annually – doubling every 10 years – to power its rapid economic growth.

“The IEA is committed to further strengthening its engagement with ASEAN,” Dr Birol said. “We will continue to help build the region’s capacity to take on emerging challenges through our world-class analysis, data and policy advice. We look forward to supporting Southeast Asian countries as their role on the global energy stage expands and they map out their paths to a cleaner and more resilient energy future.”
The IEA and Singapore co-hosted the Second Global Ministerial Conference on System Integration of Renewables (SIR Ministerial) on 27 October 2020, alongside Singapore International Energy Week (SIEW). The virtual event was co-chaired by Dr Fatih Birol, IEA Executive Director, and H.E. Dr. Tan See Leng, Minister in the Prime Minister’s Office, and Second Minister of Industry and Trade, and of Manpower, Singapore.

Following the first SIR Ministerial in 2019, co-hosted by the IEA and Germany, over 30 Ministers, Senior Officials, and CEOs gathered for an in-depth virtual dialogue on key power sector concerns, against the backdrop of the Covid-19 pandemic. Topics included accelerating investment in renewable energy technology and infrastructure, and pathways to develop resilient and flexible power systems.

The IEA also launched Power Systems in Transition, its first report in an upcoming series on Electricity Security, highlighting the three key challenges to ensuring future energy security: Energy Transitions, Cyber Risks, and Climate Change.

The event featured opening remarks by Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Energy of Thailand, H.E. Supattanapong Punmeechaow, and closing remarks by Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources of Indonesia, H.E. Arifin Tasrif. Speakers included Ministers from Hungary, Portugal, Poland, and the Philippines, while CEOs from major companies included GE Renewables, Hitatchi ABB Powergrids, DBS Bank, and the State Grid Corporation of China. The event showcased the steps countries and companies are taking to build power system enhancement into clean energy transitions as part of sustainable, resilient and secure recoveries from COVID-19.

The IEA is currently exploring opportunities and themes for the third SIR Ministerial, to take place in 2021.
Following the release of the World Energy Outlook 2020, the IEA’s flagship publication, the agency is hosting a series of live-streamed discussions on different aspects of the analysis, through the week beginning Monday 16 November.

Starting at 2pm CET each day, the five online conversations will cover the impacts of Covid-19, the outlooks for electricity and for fuels, the pathways to net zero emissions, and the investments that can accelerate clean energy transitions. In each case, an introductory presentation on the WEO-2020 from some of its lead authors will set the stage, followed by commentary and insights from invited expert panellists and a moderated discussion. Details on each event are available at the links below.

The World Energy Outlook 2020 provides a comprehensive view of how the global energy system could develop in the coming decades. This year’s exceptional circumstances require an exceptional approach, and the new Outlook explores in detail the implications of the Covid-19 pandemic for the energy sector and the near-term actions that could accelerate clean energy transitions.
Renewable power is growing robustly around the world this year, contrasting with the sharp declines triggered by the Covid-19 crisis in many other parts of the energy sector such as oil, gas and coal, according to a report from the International Energy Agency released today.

Driven by China and the United States, new additions of renewable power capacity worldwide will increase to a record level of almost 200 gigawatts this year, the IEA’s Renewables 2020 report forecasts. This rise – representing almost 90% of the total expansion in overall power capacity globally – is led by wind, hydropower and solar PV. Wind and solar additions are set to jump by 30% in both the United States and China as developers rush to take advantage of expiring incentives.

Even stronger growth is to come. India and the European Union will be the driving forces behind a record expansion of global renewable capacity additions of nearly 10% next year – the fastest growth since 2015 – according to the report. This is the result of the commissioning of delayed projects where construction and supply chains were disrupted by the pandemic, and growth in markets where the pre-Covid project pipeline was robust. India is expected to be the largest contributor to the renewables upswing in 2021, with the country’s annual additions doubling from 2020.

“Renewable power is defying the difficulties caused by the pandemic, showing robust growth while other fuels struggle,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “The resilience and positive prospects of the sector are clearly reflected by continued strong appetite from investors – and the future looks even brighter with new capacity additions on course to set fresh records this year and next.”

Over the first 10 months of 2020, China, India and the European Union have driven auctioned renewable power capacity worldwide 15% higher than in the same period last year – a new record that shows expectations of strong demand for renewables over the medium and long term. At the same time, shares of publicly listed renewable equipment manufacturers and project developers have been outperforming most major stock market indices and the overall energy sector. By October, shares of solar companies worldwide had more than doubled in value from December 2019.

However, policy makers still need to take steps to support the strong momentum behind renewables. In the IEA report’s main forecast, the expiry of incentives in key markets and the resulting uncertainties lead to a small decline in renewables capacity additions in 2022. But if countries address these policy uncertainties in time, the report estimates that global solar PV and wind additions could each increase by a further 25% in 2022.

Critical factors influencing the pace of deployment will be policy decisions in key markets like China, and effective support for rooftop solar PV, which has been impacted by the crisis as households and businesses reprioritised investments. Under favourable policy conditions, solar PV annual additions could reach a record level of 150 gigawatts (GW) by 2022 – an increase of almost 40% in just three years.

“Renewables are resilient to the Covid crisis but not to policy uncertainties,” said Dr Birol. “Governments can tackle these issues to help bring about a sustainable recovery and accelerate clean energy transitions. In the United States, for instance, if the proposed clean electricity policies of the next US administration are implemented, they could lead to a much more rapid deployment of solar PV and wind, contributing to a faster decarbonisation of the power sector.”

The electricity generated by renewable technologies will increase by 7% globally in 2020, underpinned by the record new capacity additions, the report estimates. This growth comes despite a 5% annual drop in global energy demand, the largest since the Second World War.

However, renewables outside the electricity sector are suffering from the impacts of the Covid crisis. Biofuels used in transport are set to experience their first annual decline in two decades, driven by the wider plunge in transport fuel demand this year as well as lower fossil fuel prices reducing the economic attractiveness of biofuels. Demand for bioenergy in industry is also falling as a result of the wider drop in economic activity. The net result of these declines and the growth of renewable power is an expected overall increase of 1% in global renewable energy demand in 2020.

Renewable fuels for transport and industry are an area in particular need of potential policy support, as the sector has been severely hit by the demand shock caused by the crisis. More can and should be done, to support deployment and innovation in bioenergy to supply sustainable fuels for those sectors.

The report’s outlook for the next five years sees cost reductions and sustained policy support continuing to drive strong growth in renewable power technologies. Total wind and solar PV capacity is on course to surpass natural gas in 2023 and coal in 2024. Driven by rapid cost declines, annual offshore wind additions are set to surge, accounting for one-fifth of the total wind market in 2025. The growing capacity will take the amount of renewable electricity produced globally to new heights.

“In 2025, renewables are set to become the largest source of electricity generation worldwide, ending coal’s five decades as the top power provider,” said Dr Birol. “By that time, renewables are expected to supply one-third of the world’s electricity – and their total capacity will be twice the size of the entire power capacity of China today.”
Mr. David Turk has been appointed as IEA Deputy Executive Director and will take up duties immediately.

Mr. Turk, who joined the IEA in September 2016 as head of the Energy Environment Division, had been serving as Acting Deputy Executive Director since the beginning of the year.

During his time at the IEA, Mr. Turk has played a key role in promoting more secure, sustainable and resilient energy systems. He has been instrumental in many high-profile IEA projects, including on Digitalization and Energy, Tracking Clean Energy Progress, the Future of Hydrogen, as well as advising on many other reports and analyses.

“Dave brings with him a wealth of energy policy experience, a genuine passion and a team-based approach to his work and great enthusiasm,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director.

Before joining the IEA, Mr. Turk was the Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Climate and Technology at the US Department of Energy. He also helped spearhead the creation and launch of Mission Innovation and led the process to revamp and upgrade the Clean Energy Ministerial. He has served in various capacities in the US government, including as Deputy Special Envoy for Climate Change at the US State Department, as Special Assistant to the President in the National Security Council, as well as in Congress, where he was a Staff Director for the National Security and Foreign Affairs Oversight Subcommittee.

Mr. Turk holds a J.D. from the University of Virginia School of Law, and graduated from the University of Illinois. Mr. Turk is married to Emily Turk, a sustainability expert and registered architect, and they have three children together.

He succeeds Mr. Paul Simons who served as IEA Deputy Executive Director between 2015 and early 2020.
Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director, participated in an online conference between the Prime Minister of India, the Hon. Narendra Modi, and global energy leaders on Tuesday, to discuss the outlook for the sector.

Prime Minister Modi emphasised that providing all Indians with equitable access to clean, affordable and sustainable energy was at the core of the government’s policy. He outlined India’s rise as a major consumer of energy globally, and reinforced the government’s commitment to fighting climate change. He outlined his view of the key drivers of India’s energy future, covering a broad range of fuels and technologies across the energy sector.

Dr Birol highlighted that India had now moved to the centre stage of global energy markets, as described in the IEA’s first World Energy Outlook Special Report on India, which was published in 2015. The IEA will take another deep analytical review of India’s prospects in an upcoming WEO energy outlook, due to be released in early 2021. In his intervention, Dr. Birol noted the Government of India’s achievements in energy access, energy efficiency, and energy security, and looked forward to moving forward as Strategic Partner with India.

The event was organised by NITI Aayog and MoPNG, in association with the India Energy Forum by CERA Week. It included 40 energy leaders including CEO of Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC) and United Arab Emirates Minister of Industry and Advanced Technology, HE Dr Sultan Ahmed Al Jaber; CEO of Reliance Industries, Mr Mukesh Ambani; and CEO of BP, Mr Bernard Looney.
Singapore and the International Energy Agency today co-hosted the second Global Ministerial Conference on System Integration of Renewables (SIR). The Conference was held as part of the Singapore International Energy Week (SIEW) 2020.

This is the first SIR Ministerial Conference to be held in Asia. Under the theme “Investment, Integration, and Resilience: A Secure, Clean Energy Future,” the SIR Ministerial Conference brought together close to 30 Energy Ministers, global CEOs and thought leaders to discuss emerging issues in the acceleration of renewables integration and power system resilience with a strong focus on Asia and Southeast Asia. The IEA also launched its new report on electricity security, Power Systems in Transition, at the Conference. The report provides important recommendations on modernising power grids for greater reliability and flexibility.

Singapore’s Minister in the Prime Minister’s Office and Second Minister for Trade & Industry, and Manpower and co-Chair of the SIR Ministerial Dr Tan See Leng said: “International cooperation and public-private partnerships remain vital as we navigate towards a more sustainable energy future. As we address the urgent need to future-proof our systems to create more resilience and flexibility, we must also increase the share of, and enhance the integration of renewable energy in our energy systems. We look forward to working with the IEA to advance global energy transitions.”

“The IEA is pleased to partner with Singapore for the 2nd Ministerial Conference on System Integration of Renewables as the country sits at the heart of Asia, a region that will be critical in shaping the future of global energy markets,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “Today, we shared important lessons from across Asia and beyond on how best to integrate growing shares of wind and solar into power systems while maintaining security of supply. This will be crucial if renewables are to become the fundamental cornerstone of global clean energy transitions.”

Singapore’s cooperation with the IEA has deepened significantly since it became an Association country of the IEA in 2016. Singapore and the IEA have co-hosted many innovative initiatives and programmes to advance the global energy agenda. These include the training programmes under the Singapore-Regional Training Hub, the Singapore-IEA Forum and the Capacity Building Roadmap on Energy Investment and Financing for ASEAN.
New IEA report offers recommendations for how to respond to evolving challenges for electricity systems from growth of variable renewable electricity, cyber threats and extreme weather events.

The electricity sector, which plays a large and growing role in energy systems around the world, is undergoing its most dramatic transformation since its creation more than a century ago. The importance of electricity is only set to increase in the years ahead, calling for a more comprehensive approach to electricity security to meet evolving challenges such as cyber threats, extreme weather events and rapidly growing shares of variable electricity generation from wind and solar power, according to a new report by the International Energy Agency.

The report, Power Systems in Transition, is the first major global study to examine in depth these three key areas for the future of electricity security at the same time and offer recommendations for addressing them in a way that supports the acceleration of clean energy transitions globally.

“Energy security is at the heart of the IEA’s mission because it is critical for social wellbeing, economic prosperity and successful clean energy transitions. We are dedicated to helping countries around the world ensure that all their citizens have access to clean, reliable and affordable energy,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “Electricity is essential for the functioning of modern societies – as the Covid-19 crisis has highlighted – and for bringing down global emissions. This is why we are continuing to expand and deepen our work on electricity security.”

The report is being launched today at the 2nd Global Ministerial Conference on System Integration of Renewables, which is co-hosted by the IEA and the Singapore government. The event will bring together Ministers, industry CEOs and thought leaders from around the world for discussions on the theme of “Investment, Integration and Resilience: A Secure, Clean Energy Future.”

Electricity accounts for one-fifth of global energy consumption today, and its share is rising. It is set to play a bigger role in heating, cooling and transport as well as many digitally integrated sectors such as communication, finance and healthcare. In pathways towards meeting international energy and climate goals, such as the IEA Sustainable Development Scenario, the trend will accelerate. In that scenario, electricity could surpass oil as the world’s largest energy source by 2040. Wind and solar’s share of global electricity generation would rise from 7% to 45%, with all renewables combined generating more than 70% of the total.

Many countries today enjoy a high level of electricity security thanks to centrally controlled systems, relatively simple supply chains, and power plants that can supply electricity whenever needed. But recent technology and policy developments are now radically changing the sector and with it, the electricity security model that has prevailed for the past century. These developments include steep declines in the costs of variable renewables, the trends of decentralisation and digitalisation, and the impacts of climate change.

The challenge for governments and utilities is to update policies, regulations and market designs to ensure that power systems remain secure throughout clean energy transitions. The new IEA report maps out key steps for achieving this. An essential goal is to make systems more flexible so they can smoothly accommodate the variable electricity production from wind and solar. This includes making the best use of the flexibility on offer from existing power plants that can generate electricity when required, as well as increasing investments in grids and other sources of flexibility such as demand-side technologies and storage resources. However, global investment in these areas is declining, a trend that has been exacerbated by the Covid-19 crisis. An increase in investments should be facilitated by better-designed markets that reward power system resources that deliver flexibility and capacity.

The growing digitalisation of electricity systems, the rise of smart grids and the shift to a wider distribution of generation resources offers many opportunities and benefits. But with cyber threats already substantial and growing, it is imperative to strengthen cyber resilience measures and make them a central part of the planning and operation of power systems. Governments can achieve this through a wide range of policy and regulatory approaches – from highly prescriptive ones to framework-oriented, performance-based ones.

The effects of climate change mean that electricity systems need to become more resilient to the impacts of changing weather patterns, rising sea levels and more extreme weather events. This can be accomplished by giving a high priority to climate resilience in electricity security policies and establishing better standards to guide the necessary investments. Enhancing the resilience of electricity systems to climate change also brings multiple benefits.

The new IEA report identifies best practices and lessons learned from around the globe. It also provides a set of recommendations for institutional frameworks that establish clear responsibilities, incentives and rules; measures to identify, manage and mitigate risks; and protocols to monitor progress, respond and recover, including through emergency response exercises.

“The IEA is the world’s energy authority where governments and industry leaders can share experiences and expertise to help move the world towards a more secure and sustainable energy future,” said Dr Birol. “This report is the reference manual for policy-making on electricity security now and for years to come.”

The IEA’s expanding work on energy security challenges will next year include a special report providing a forward-looking assessment of the global supply of critical minerals for clean energy technologies.
It has been a tumultuous year for the global energy system. The Covid-19 crisis has caused more disruption than any other event in recent history, leaving scars that will last for years to come. But whether this upheaval ultimately helps or hinders efforts to accelerate clean energy transitions and reach international energy and climate goals will depend on how governments respond to today’s challenges.

The World Energy Outlook 2020, the International Energy Agency’s flagship publication, focuses on the pivotal period of the next 10 years, exploring different pathways out of the crisis. The new report provides the latest IEA analysis of the pandemic’s impact: global energy demand is set to drop by 5% in 2020, energy-related CO2 emissions by 7%, and energy investment by 18%. The WEO’s established approach – comparing different scenarios that show how the energy sector could develop – is more valuable than ever in these uncertain times. The four pathways presented in this WEO are described in more detail at the end of this press release.

In the Stated Policies Scenario, which reflects today’s announced policy intentions and targets, global energy demand rebounds to its pre-crisis level in early 2023. However, this does not happen until 2025 in the event of a prolonged pandemic and deeper slump, as shown in the Delayed Recovery Scenario. Slower demand growth lowers the outlook for oil and gas prices compared with pre-crisis trends. But large falls in investment increase the risk of future market volatility.

Renewables take starring roles in all our scenarios, with solar centre stage. Supportive policies and maturing technologies are enabling very cheap access to capital in leading markets. Solar PV is now consistently cheaper than new coal- or gas-fired power plants in most countries, and solar projects now offer some of the lowest cost electricity ever seen. In the Stated Policies Scenario, renewables meet 80% of global electricity demand growth over the next decade. Hydropower remains the largest renewable source, but solar is the main source of growth, followed by onshore and offshore wind.

“I see solar becoming the new king of the world’s electricity markets. Based on today’s policy settings, it is on track to set new records for deployment every year after 2022,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director. “If governments and investors step up their clean energy efforts in line with our Sustainable Development Scenario, the growth of both solar and wind would be even more spectacular – and hugely encouraging for overcoming the world’s climate challenge.”

The WEO-2020 shows that strong growth of renewables needs to be paired with robust investment in electricity grids. Without enough investment, grids will prove to be a weak link in the transformation of the power sector, with implications for the reliability and security of electricity supply.

Fossil fuels face varying challenges. Coal demand does not return to pre-crisis levels in the Stated Policies Scenario, with its share in the 2040 energy mix falling below 20% for the first time since the Industrial Revolution. But demand for natural gas grows significantly, mainly in Asia, while oil remains vulnerable to the major economic uncertainties resulting from the pandemic.

“The era of global oil demand growth will come to an end in the next decade,” Dr Birol said. “But without a large shift in government policies, there is no sign of a rapid decline. Based on today’s policy settings, a global economic rebound would soon push oil demand back to pre-crisis levels.”

The worst effects of the crisis are felt among the most vulnerable. The pandemic has reversed several years of declines in the number of people in Sub-Saharan Africa without access to electricity. And a rise in poverty levels may have made basic electricity services unaffordable for more than 100 million people worldwide who had electricity connections.

Global emissions are set to bounce back more slowly than after the financial crisis of 2008-2009, but the world is still a long way from a sustainable recovery. A step-change in clean energy investment offers a way to boost economic growth, create jobs and reduce emissions. This approach has not yet featured prominently in plans proposed to date, except in the European Union, the United Kingdom, Canada, Korea, New Zealand and a handful of other countries.

In the Sustainable Development Scenario, which shows how to put the world on track to achieving sustainable energy objectives in full, the complete implementation of the IEA Sustainable Recovery Plan moves the global energy economy onto a different post-crisis path. As well as rapid growth of solar, wind and energy efficiency technologies, the next 10 years would see a major scaling up of hydrogen and carbon capture, utilisation and storage, and new momentum behind nuclear power.

“Despite a record drop in global emissions this year, the world is far from doing enough to put them into decisive decline. The economic downturn has temporarily suppressed emissions, but low economic growth is not a low-emissions strategy – it is a strategy that would only serve to further impoverish the world’s most vulnerable populations,” said Dr Birol. “Only faster structural changes to the way we produce and consume energy can break the emissions trend for good. Governments have the capacity and the responsibility to take decisive actions to accelerate clean energy transitions and put the world on a path to reaching our climate goals, including net-zero emissions.”

A significant part of those efforts would have to focus on reducing emissions from existing energy infrastructure – such as coal plants, steel mills and cement factories. Otherwise, international climate goals will be pushed out of reach, regardless of actions in other areas. Detailed new analysis in the WEO-2020 shows that if today’s energy infrastructure continues to operate in the same way as it has done so far, it would already lock in a temperature rise of 1.65 °C.

Despite such major challenges, the vision of a net-zero emissions world is increasingly coming into focus. The ambitious pathway mapped out in the Sustainable Development Scenario relies on countries and companies hitting their announced net-zero emissions targets on time and in full, bringing the entire world to net zero by 2070.

Reaching that point two decades earlier, as in the new Net Zero Emissions by 2050 case, would demand a set of dramatic additional actions over the next 10 years. Bringing about a 40% reduction in emissions by 2030 requires, for example, that low-emissions sources provide nearly 75% of global electricity generation in 2030, up from less than 40% in 2019 – and that more than 50% of passenger cars sold worldwide in 2030 are electric, up from 2.5% in 2019. Electrification, innovation, behaviour changes and massive efficiency gains would all play roles. No part of the energy economy could lag behind, as it is unlikely that another would be able to move fast enough to make up the difference.
Liquefied natural gas (LNG) remains central to ensuring the security of global natural gas supplies and has played a major role in the sector’s adjustment to the exceptional drop in global gas demand during the first half of 2020, the International Energy Agency said today in a new report.

Global gas demand is expected to fall this year by 3%, or 120 billion cubic metres (bcm), its largest annual drop on record, the Global Gas Security Review 2020 finds. The report highlights that LNG contracting activity is on a sharp downward trend from its 2018 high. Covid-19 is a major cause of the historic demand shock, but the strong decrease in contracting activity is largely the result of a well-supplied market. At the same time, investment decisions have come to a standstill. After a record-setting 2019, no new liquefaction projects have been confirmed so far this year.

In this slowdown, LNG continues to play a central role in balancing global gas markets and creating the flexibility to adjust to fluctuations in demand. Faced with an unprecedented fall in global gas demand in the first half of the year, gas producers and exporters have had to provide flexibility to adjust supply. LNG was one of the key components of this adjustment, with monthly global exports decreasing by 17% between January and July 2020.

“Since the IEA started tracking flexibility in LNG markets in the first edition of the Global Gas Security Review five years ago, we have seen a notable improvement across a range of LNG market flexibility metrics. This is improving security of supply and was critical in enabling the market to adjust to the historic demand shock witnessed in the first half of 2020,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director.

Global gas demand fell by an estimated 4% year-on-year in the first half of 2020 due to the combination of the Covid-19 crisis and an exceptionally mild winter in the northern hemisphere. Most of the declines in gas consumption took place in mature markets across Europe, North America and Asia. Taken together, these markets account for over 80% of the forecast drop in global natural gas demand for 2020.

During the second quarter of 2020, when lockdowns were at their peak worldwide, natural gas spot prices plummeted to their lowest levels in at least a decade across all major gas-consuming regions. But prices recorded strong gains in the third quarter, supported by supply adjustments and recovering demand.

Natural gas demand is forecast to increase by 3%, or about 130 bcm, in 2021. However, the recent resurgence of Covid-19 and the prospect of a prolonged pandemic have increased uncertainty over the pace of recovery in 2021. The recovery of global gas demand in 2021 is likely to be supported by fast-growing markets in Asia, Africa and the Middle East. More mature markets should see gradual recoveries, and some may not return to their 2019 levels until 2022 or later.

“Global gas demand has been progressively recovering since June, driven mainly by emerging markets,” Dr Birol said. “However, this does not mean a return to business as usual, as the current crisis could have long-lasting repercussions.”
Ministers and high-level officials from Latin American countries accounting for close to 70% of the region’s energy demand met on 7 October to examine how to put energy at the heart of their post-Covid economic recovery while moving towards more sustainable and resilient energy systems in a way that creates opportunity for all.

Chaired by Dr Fatih Birol, the Executive Director of the International Energy Agency, and Alfonso Blanco, the Executive Secretary of the Latin American Energy Organization (OLADE), the virtual roundtable featured contributions from leading figures including Brigadier Mark Phillips, the Prime Minister of Guyana, and Mauricio Claver-Carone, the President of the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).

Ministers speaking at the event represented many of Latin America’s leading energy producers and consumers: Minister Bento Albuquerque of Brazil, Minister Diego Mesa Puyo of Colombia, Minister Juan Carlos Jobet of Chile, Minister René Ortíz Durán of Ecuador, Minister Alberto Pimentel Mata of Guatemala and Secretary Jorge Rivera Staff of Panama. Heads of regional organisations – such as the Ibero-American Association of Energy Regulators and the Regional Commission for Energy Integration – and senior officials from Germany, Japan, Spain and the United States also took part in the discussions. The full agenda of the event is available below.

Participants agreed that the Covid-19 crisis has done tremendous damage but that it has also created some opportunities to improve Latin America’s energy landscape, including by incorporating new technologies and more sustainable practices. They highlighted the need to keep up momentum behind the deployment of renewable technologies like wind and solar while ensuring security of supply, sufficient investments in grids and strengthening of regional and international cooperation.

“This vital dialogue highlighted Latin America’s many strengths – both in terms of its pioneering achievements on renewables, its rich energy resources and its diverse and dynamic population. I’m confident that the region has the potential to build a bright energy future,” said Dr Birol. “The IEA is very pleased to be working closely with OLADE and the IDB on many fronts, and we look forward to deepening this cooperation further. The IEA stands ready to partner with Latin American countries in pursuit of a sustainable and resilient recovery from Covid-19.”

“The pandemic is forcing us to revisit our long-term strategies so that our region’s energy sector can act as a motor bringing much-needed dynamism to the post-Covid economic recovery,” Mr Blanco said. “OLADE is delighted to have partnered with the IEA for today’s valuable discussions that will help inform the decision-making of Latin American energy leaders going forward.”
The buildings sector plays a critical role in clean energy transitions as it accounts for more than 30% of global energy use and 30% of energy related emissions. The sector also has huge potential to be a “job machine” and contribute to sustainable recoveries by creating more than three million jobs alone according to the IEA Sustainable Recovery Plan.

To highlight this critical importance of sustainable buildings, the IEA and Tsinghua University held the 6th joint workshop on the topic of sustainable recovery of the building sector on 28 September 2020 which brought together online more than 70 international and Chinese academics, engineers, policy officers and private players.

The first session of the workshop focused on cooling, which is the fastest growing use of energy in buildings. With China accounting for roughly 40% of global electricity consumption for residential air conditioners and about one-fifth of global electricity consumption for refrigerators, efficient cooling is an indispensable element for sustainable buildings in China.

Against this background, Brian Motherway, Head of IEA Energy Efficiency at the IEA opened the session by highlighting the building efficiency opportunities that can be exploited in line with China’s commitment to carbon neutrality by 2060. The director of Tsinghua University Buildings Research Center, Professor Jiang Yi, highlighted the importance of an integrated approach to efficient building that includes greener building design, advanced technology, and smarter behaviours.

The second session on renewable integration provided equally important messages for green buildings. Timur Gül, Head of IEA Energy Technology Policy at the IEA, shared highlights from the recently released Energy Technology Perspectives 2020, featuring a global pathway to net-zero carbon emission from the energy sector. Experts from China, the Europe Commission, and the United States followed by sharing insights on a wide range of topics from policy making to renewable technology and digitalisation. Specific perspectives were provided by Chinese local private players like Broad group and Nanjing Guochen DC Power Distribution Technology Co., Ltd..

The IEA and Tsinghua University will continue to cooperate on promoting sustainable buildings in China, drawing on IEA’s increasing work on behavioural insights, digitalisation and smart cities.

For more information and the full agenda, visit the event page.
The International Energy Agency and the European Patent Office (EPO) have signed a Memorandum of Understanding on bilateral cooperation with the aim of promoting innovation in sustainable energy technologies. Under the MoU, the two organisations will publish a series of joint studies over the next three years to inform policymakers and the public about technology trends in areas that are critical for the energy transition and climate change mitigation.

The EPO and IEA published their first joint report, Innovation in batteries and electricity storage, last week, revealing that over the past decade, patenting activity in these technologies grew four times faster than the average of all technologies. It also highlighted that much more technological progress in electricity storage will be needed in future to meet the demands of the energy transition.

“Tracking energy innovation is crucial to ensure there are no gaps when it comes to developing and deploying the clean energy technologies that we will need to meet our energy and climate goals,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “The EPO is a world leader in this field, with its rich datasets and vast experience. The IEA is delighted to be deepening our already close cooperation with the EPO through this MoU, which will allow us to get an even better picture of where the private and public sectors are focusing their energy innovation efforts.”

"The EPO's patent classification scheme for climate change mitigation and adaptation technologies has become a widely-used standard for monitoring progress in green technologies around the world," said EPO President António Campinos. "Drawing on the IEA's unparalleled expertise in the field of energy enables us to go one step further. I am convinced that our co-operation will help innovators in the sector get ahead of the technology curve. It will provide decision-makers with high-quality data and analysis on innovative solutions to meeting the clean energy needs of industry and society as a whole.”

Cooperation between the two organisations will benefit from their combined expertise in the domains of energy technology and patent information. The large respective stakeholder communities that both the EPO and IEA have built up during almost 50 years of activity will significantly increase the impact of the joint studies.

Innovation is increasingly recognised as a core part of energy policy, and this year the IEA has been introducing more tools to help decision-makers understand the technology landscape and their role in it – and to track progress in innovation and the deployment of technologies. This includes a comprehensive interactive guide to the market readiness of more than 400 clean energy technologies.
After years of slow progress, technologies to capture carbon emissions and store or reuse them are gaining momentum, a trend that will need to accelerate significantly for the world to achieve its energy and climate goals, according to a new special report released by the IEA today.

The report, CCUS in Clean Energy Transitions, is being launched at an IEA online event opened by Prime Minister Erna Solberg of Norway, whose government announced a major funding commitment this week for a new carbon capture project that can help tackle emissions from Norway and neighbouring countries.

Carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) is the only group of technologies that contributes both to reducing emissions in key sectors directly and to removing CO2 from the atmosphere to balance the emissions that are the hardest to prevent – a crucial part of reaching the net-zero emissions goals that a growing number of governments and companies have set for themselves.

Part of the IEA’s Energy Technology Perspectives Series, the new IEA report is the most comprehensive global study on CCUS to date. It assesses the state of play of CCUS technologies and maps out the evolving and expanding role they will need to play to put global emissions on a sustainable trajectory. It includes a detailed analysis of CO2 emissions from power and industrial facilities in China, Europe and the United States and potential for storing them.

“The scale of the climate challenge means we need to act across a wide range of energy technologies. Carbon capture is critical for ensuring our transitions to clean energy are secure and sustainable,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director.

“In order to develop and deploy carbon capture and storage as a technology for the future we need investments in solutions and facilities in many regions and countries,” said Prime Minister Solberg. “CCUS will be necessary on a global scale if we are to meet the Paris Agreement. And we must start now.”

“Norway has been a global leader in researching, developing and implementing carbon capture technologies, as demonstrated by its major funding commitment this week to the impressive Longship project, which can help not just Norway but other European countries reduce their emissions,” Dr Birol said. “The IEA is delighted and honoured that Prime Minister Solberg is taking part in the launch of our new report that will help inform policy-making on CCUS around the world.”

Plans for more than 30 commercial CCUS facilities have been announced globally in the last three years. And projects now nearing a final investment decision represent an estimated potential investment of around USD 27 billion – more than double the investment planned in 2017. This portfolio of projects is increasingly diverse and would double the amount of CO2 captured globally.

The report sets out the four main ways that CCUS technologies contribute to clean energy transitions:

Tackling emissions from existing energy infrastructure such as power and industrial plants;

Providing a solution for some of the most challenging emissions from heavy industries like cement and chemicals, as well as from aviation;

Offering a cost-effective pathway for low-carbon hydrogen production in many regions;

Removing CO2 from the atmosphere.

Although CCUS facilities have been operating for decades in certain industries like natural gas and fertilisers, they are still at an early stage of development in key sectors such as cement. These are the areas where CCUS technologies are particularly important for tackling emissions because of a lack of alternatives.

“Action from governments will be essential for establishing a sustainable and viable market for CCUS,” Dr Birol said. “But industry must also embrace the opportunity. No sector will be unaffected by clean energy transitions – and for some, including heavy industry, the value of CCUS is inescapable. As our new report demonstrates, the IEA is committed to leading CCUS analysis and policy advice worldwide – and to bringing together governments, companies and other key players to work together to achieve our shared energy and climate goals.”
The Netherlands is taking a well-balanced approach to its plans for a rapid transition to a carbon-neutral economy that will support strong growth and energy security, according to a new energy policy review by the International Energy Agency.

To drive this ambitious shift, the Netherlands has focused its energy and climate policy on cutting greenhouse emissions, with targets to reduce emissions by 49% by 2030 and by 95% by 2050 from 1990 levels. In June 2019, it adopted a national Climate Agreement that was developed through a process involving diverse groups from across Dutch society that worked together to define policies and measures aimed at achieving these targets.

“The Netherlands’ Climate Agreement shows broad social and political commitment to its energy transition and serves as an excellent example of how collaborative policy-making can lay the framework for ambitious targets,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director. “The IEA looks forward to supporting the government as it implements its plans.”

The Netherlands faces notable challenges, the IEA policy review highlights, since its economy remains heavily reliant on fossil fuels and has a concentration of energy- and emission-intensive industries. The IEA report welcomes the steps the government is taking to address these challenges. These include the introduction of carbon pricing for industrial emissions and a competitive subsidy programme that supports a wide variety of emission reduction technologies. It also applauds the government’s leadership in supporting electric vehicles through incentives to purchase them and significant investments in charging infrastructure.

“I congratulate the Netherlands for developing a broad policy framework with robust measures to drive emission reductions in all sectors,” Dr Birol said. “The balance of ambitious targets and competitive support measures will help drive a cost-effective energy transition.”

The IEA report highlights new energy security challenges the Netherlands is facing. In line with its climate targets and in response to safety concerns over earthquakes caused by natural gas production, the government plans to end production from the Groningen gas field by mid-2022. Gas from Groningen covers a large share of the Netherlands’ heating and industrial energy demand and is a key source of regional gas supply.

The government is taking firm measures to reduce natural gas demand, both domestically and in cooperation with neighbouring countries. At the same time, it is taking a leading role in developing a market for low-carbon hydrogen to partly replace natural gas and drive emission reductions in hard-to-decarbonise sectors like industry and heavy transportation. This is complemented by support for carbon capture and storage, which is also aimed at lowering industrial emissions.

“The Netherlands has a clear vision for reducing its dependence on natural gas while protecting energy security,” Dr Birol said. “In addition, its commendable leadership on low-carbon hydrogen will help drive cost reductions that are needed for this important technology to play a key role in accelerating clean energy transitions around the world.”
Affordable and flexible electricity storage technologies are set to catalyse transitions to clean energy around the world, enabling cleaner electricity to penetrate a burgeoning range of applications. Between 2005 and 2018, patenting activity in batteries and other electricity storage technologies grew at an average annual rate of 14% worldwide, four times faster than the average of all technology fields, according to a new joint study published today by the European Patent Office (EPO) and the International Energy Agency.

The report, Innovation in batteries and electricity storage – a global analysis based on patent data, shows that batteries account for nearly 90% of all patenting activity in the area of electricity storage, and that the rise in innovation is chiefly driven by advances in rechargeable lithium-ion batteries used in consumer electronic devices and electric cars. Electric mobility in particular is fostering the development of new lithium-ion chemistries aimed at improving power output, durability, charge/discharge speed and recyclability. Technological progress is also being fuelled by the need to integrate larger quantities of renewable energy such as wind and solar power into electricity networks.

The joint study shows that Japan and Korea have established a strong lead in battery technology globally, and that technical progress and mass production in an increasingly mature industry have led to a significant drop in battery prices in recent years. Prices have declined by nearly 90% since 2010 in the case of lithium-ion batteries for electric vehicles, and by around two-thirds over the same period for stationary applications, including electricity grid management.

Developing better and cheaper electricity storage is a major challenge for the future. According to the IEA’s Sustainable Development Scenario, for the world to meet climate and sustainable energy goals, close to 10 000 gigawatt-hours of batteries and other forms of energy storage will be required worldwide by 2040 – 50 times the size of the current market.

“IEA projections make it clear that energy storage will need to grow exponentially in the coming decades to enable the world to meet international climate and sustainable energy goals. Accelerated innovation will be essential for achieving that growth,” said IEA Executive Director Fatih Birol. “By combining the complementary strengths of the IEA and the EPO, this report sheds new light on today’s innovation trends to help governments and businesses make smart decisions for our energy future.”

“Electricity storage technology is critical when it comes to meeting the demand for electric mobility and achieving the shift towards renewable energy that is needed if we are to mitigate climate change,” said EPO President António Campinos. “The rapid and sustained rise in electricity storage innovation shows that inventors and businesses are tackling the challenge of the energy transition. The patent data reveals that while Asia has a strong lead in this strategic industry, the US and Europe can count on a rich innovation ecosystem, including a large number of SMEs and research institutions, to help them stay in the race for the next generation of batteries.”

The joint study follows the publication earlier in September of the major IEA report Energy Technology Perspectives 2020, which has deepened the IEA’s technology analysis, setting out the challenges and opportunities associated with rapid clean energy transitions.

As governments and companies seek to make informed investments in clean energy innovation for the future, sector-specific insights like those offered by the joint study will be highly valuable, including for helping bring about a sustainable economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis. The innovation study provides an authoritative overview of the technologies and applications receiving research attention – and of those that are underserved. It also shows where they stand in the competitive landscape.

Innovation is increasingly recognised as a core part of energy policy, and this year the IEA has been introducing more tools to help decision-makers understand the technology landscape and their role in it – and to track progress in innovation and the deployment of technologies. This includes a comprehensive new interactive guide to the market readiness of more than 400 clean energy technologies.
In collaboration with NITI Aayog, the International Energy Agency held the India launch of the Special Report on Sustainable Recovery from the IEA’s flagship World Energy Outlook series on 18 September.

To help countries rebuild better from the Covid-19 crisis, the report sets out a series of actions that can be taken over the next three years to revitalise economies and boost employment while making energy systems cleaner and more resilient.

The launch took place as an online webinar introduced by Dr Fatih Birol, the Executive Director of the IEA, and Shri Amitabh Kant, the CEO of NITI Aayog, in the presence of Shri Piyush Goyal, Minister of Railways and Minister of Commerce & Industry. The launch also included Ms Laura Cozzi, the IEA’s Chief Energy Modeller, who presented the key findings of the report, as well as Dr Krishnamurthy V. Subramanian, the Government of India’s Chief Economic Advisor.

NITI Aayog CEO Amitabh Kant welcomed and commended the work by the IEA, saying: "After the 2008-09 financial crisis, green measures accounted for around 16% of total stimulus measures. To recover from Covid-19-inflicted impact, we have to be even more ambitious and decisive towards clean investments. Given that need, the IEA’s Sustainable Recovery Plan has a very useful role in guiding governments, businesses, technologists and other key decision makers across the globe. NITI Aayog has been championing sustainable initiatives since its inception. SDG Index, Electric Mobility Mission, ACC Battery scheme and our leadership in methanol economy initiatives stand testament to NITI Aayog’s commitment to sustainable causes.”

Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA Executive Director, commented: “Even though Covid-19 has made 2020 such a grim year, I see increasing grounds for optimism for clean energy transitions globally. This is in part due to solar becoming even more competitive thanks to efforts of countries like India. Our Sustainable Recovery Plan shows governments how to tackle today’s major economic, energy and climate challenges simultaneously. The key opportunities for India include increasing support for electric vehicles, continued investment in the power sector, and improving energy access in rural areas through improvements to the clean cooking programme.”

Congratulating the IEA on the report, Minister of Railways and Commerce & Industry, Hon’ble Minister Piyush Goyal complimented the IEA and said that the report comes at a very crucial juncture when India and other countries are in the recovery phase from the Covid-19 crisis, and this is the right time to move forward and prepare for a resilient and sustainable future as highlighted in the IEA’s report. He noted that this crisis could be used as an opportunity for energy transitions to be smoother, faster, more resilient and more affordable. He also mentioned that Indian Railways is committed to and confident in achieving 100% electrification by December 2023 and becoming a net-zero emitter by 2030.

In his special address, the Chief Economic Advisor discussed India’s economic situation and recovery pathway. Dr K V Subramanian said: “The World Economic Forum pointed out that if we look at the number of countries whose GDP per capita is going to shrink this year, this will be the highest in the last 150 years. The last time this happened was in 1870 – this is indeed an unprecedented crisis and we are living through a once-in-a-one-and-a-half-century kind of event.” Based on the evidence that the recovery is clearly on, Dr Subramanian mentioned that the crisis has highlighted the role for economic development to happen in a sustained manner and India is in the forefront of this effort.

As governments around the world respond to Covid-19, the IEA’s report, which was prepared in cooperation with the International Monetary Fund, details which energy-focused policies and investments could help boost economic growth, create jobs and put emissions into structural decline while making energy systems more cost-effective, secure and resilient.

The report brings out key areas for creating jobs in the sectors like electricity, transportation, buildings, industry and sustainable biofuels and innovations. A combination of policy actions and targeted investments will offer huge benefits to the economy and lead to job creation. However, the measures highlighted in the report remain the sovereign choice of the country.
The Business 20 (B20), the official voice of the global business community across the G20, and the International Energy Agency (IEA) today issued a Joint Statement to call on the G20 Leaders to accelerate clean energy transitions for a resilient recovery. The call for commitment comes in the context of a series of G20 Ministerial meetings involving ministers of environment and energy.

In 2020, the Covid-19 pandemic has led to a historic, yet temporary, decline in energy demand and energy-related greenhouse-gas emissions. According to the IEA, global CO2 emissions are expected to be about 8% lower in 2020 than they were in 2019. However, the pandemic also threatens the pace and scope of energy transitions with a 20% decline in global energy investments in 2020. Between now and 2050, about 3.5 trillion US dollars (USD) of annual energy investments are required globally across all energy sectors to meet the targets for a sustainable path, in line with the UN Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement.

As the world economy and energy systems recover from the crisis, the G20 Members have a unique opportunity to enact policies that prevent a rebound of CO2 emissions and support a sustainable recovery, while boosting growth and creating new green jobs.

The Joint Statement recommends specific and pragmatic policy options that could spur the much needed investment cycle if G20 countries:

accelerate the deployment of existing low-emissions and emissions-neutral technologies, and boost innovation in crucial technology areas including hydrogen, batteries, and carbon capture utilization and storage;

enhance energy market stability by improving global energy data transparency and evaluating energy market risks;

take necessary steps to secure energy systems and provide access to affordable and uninterrupted flow of clean energy for all;

implement energy pricing and tax reforms, using the revenues to finance a just transition.

Commenting on the announcement, Yousef Al-Benyan, Chair of B20, said, "The COVID-19 pandemic with historically low energy prices is a unique opportunity for governments to enact policies that steer their clean energy transitions at low financial, political and social cost."

Dr Fatih Birol, Executive Director of the IEA, added: "Mobilising the critical investments for meeting international energy and climate goals requires a grand coalition spanning governments, companies, investors and citizens. The IEA is pleased to work with the G20 and B20 to accelerate the major deployment of clean energy technologies that we need to build more sustainable and resilient energy systems. Despite the challenges we face from the Covid-19 crisis, stronger clean energy actions and ambitions from a growing number of governments and companies around the world make me increasingly optimistic for the future."
A major effort to develop and deploy clean energy technologies worldwide is urgently needed to meet international energy and climate goals, particularly in order to reduce carbon emissions from areas beyond the power sector such as transport, buildings and industry, according to a new IEA report released today.

With global carbon emissions at unacceptably high levels, structural changes to the energy system are required to achieve the rapid and lasting decline in emissions called for by the world’s shared climate targets. The IEA’s Energy Technology Perspectives 2020 – the first core ETP report for three years following a revamp of the series – analyses more than 800 different technology options to assess what would need to happen to reach net-zero emissions by 2070 while ensuring a resilient and secure energy system.

It finds that transitioning just the power sector to clean energy would get the world only one-third of the way to net-zero emissions. Completing the journey will require devoting far more attention to the transport, industry and buildings sectors, which today account for about 55% of CO2 emissions from the energy system. Much greater use of electricity in these sectors – for powering electric vehicles, recycling metals, heating buildings and many other tasks – can make the single largest contribution to reaching net-zero emissions, according to the report, although many more technologies will be needed.

“Despite the difficulties caused by the Covid-19 crisis, several recent developments give us grounds for increasing optimism about the world’s ability to accelerate clean energy transitions and reach its energy and climate goals. Still, major issues remain. This new IEA report not only shows the scale of the challenge but also offers vital guidance for overcoming it,” said Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director.

“Solar is leading renewables to new heights in markets across the globe, ultralow interest rates can help finance a growing number of clean energy projects, more governments and companies are throwing their weight behind these critical technologies, and all-important energy innovation may be about to take off,” Dr Birol said. “However, we need even more countries and businesses to get on board, we need to redouble efforts to bring energy access to all those who currently lack it, and we need to tackle emissions from the vast amounts of existing energy infrastructure in use worldwide that threaten to put our shared goals out of reach.”

Energy Technology Perspectives 2020 (ETP 2020) examines how to address the challenge of long-lasting energy assets already operating around the world – including inefficient coal power plants, steel mills and cement kilns, most of which were recently built in emerging Asian economies and could operate for decades to come. It finds that the power sector and heavy industry sectors together account for about 60% of emissions today from existing energy infrastructure. That share climbs to nearly 100% in 2050 if no action is taken to manage the existing assets’ emissions, underscoring the need for the rapid development of technologies such as hydrogen and carbon capture.

Ensuring that new clean energy technologies are available in time for key investment decisions will be critical. In heavy industries, for example, strategically timed investments could help avoid around 40% of cumulative emissions from existing infrastructure in these sectors. Accelerated innovation is crucial for this – and for scaling up the clean energy technologies needed across the energy system.

Hydrogen is expected to play a large and varied role in helping the world reach net-zero emissions by forming a bridge between the power sector and industries where the direct use of electricity would be challenging, such as steel and shipping. In the IEA’s Sustainable Development Scenario – a pathway for reaching international energy and climate goals – the global capacity of electrolysers, which produce hydrogen from water and electricity, expands to 3 300 gigawatts in 2070, from 0.2 gigawatts today. In 2070, these electrolysers consume twice the amount of electricity that China generates today. Carbon capture is also employed across a range of sectors in the Sustainable Development Scenario, including the production of synthetic fuels and some low-carbon hydrogen. And modern bioenergy directly replaces fossil fuels in areas like transport and offsets emissions indirectly through its combined use with carbon capture.

The blistering pace of technological transformation that would be necessary for the world to reach net-zero emissions by 2050 is explored in the report’s Faster Innovation Case. It finds that to meet the huge increase in demand for electricity, additions of renewable power capacity would need to average around four times the current annual record, which was reached in 2019.

Governments need to play an outsized role in accelerating clean energy transitions towards meeting international goals, according to ETP 2020. The report highlights core areas that policy makers need to make sure they address. And it notes that economic stimulus measures in response to the Covid-19 crisis offer a key opportunity to take urgent action that could boost the economy while supporting clean energy and climate goals.
More than 250 participants from 27 countries are taking part in the inaugural digital edition of the Singapore-IEA Regional Training Programme on Sustainable Energy Policies for Smart Cities. Taking place from 7-10 September 2020, this Programme brings together policy makers, urban planners and academia to look at improving energy efficiency in cities and to formulate policies that meet local urban energy challenges.

The International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that Southeast Asia’s electricity demand is set to grow at an average rate of 4% annually, based on today’s policy settings. This could result in a doubling of demand by 2040 from 2019 levels. The growth is driven by urbanisation, industrialisation and rising consumption by a growing middle class. This presents a golden opportunity for Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) cities to adopt smart, low-carbon solutions and meet rising energy demand in the most efficient way possible.

The four-day online training programme will feature experts from the IEA and Singapore government agencies, such as the Centre for Liveable Cities and Land Transport Authority. Insights on key themes of integrated spatial and transport planning, sustainable municipal services and distributed energy resources will be shared. Representatives from the Sustainable Energy Development Authority of Malaysia and the World Bank will also be presenting their experiences.

Mr Ngiam Shih Chun, Chief Executive of the Energy Market Authority (EMA), said: “The impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the global economy has been unprecedented and the energy sector has not been spared. Despite the challenges, we must not lose sight of our efforts towards a low-carbon energy future. To better manage rising energy demand in Southeast Asia, the EMA and the IEA have designed a training programme to build capacity and enhance knowledge sharing to support the region’s energy transition.”

Dr Fatih Birol, the IEA’s Executive Director, said: “Through this event, we have brought together thought leaders of today and tomorrow from across all levels of government to train them in the best ways that Southeast Asia can embrace renewables and energy efficiency to accelerate clean energy transitions in its cities. The IEA’s online training programmes and knowledge-sharing community are key to our commitment to making our expertise open and accessible to all.”

The training programme is the fourth activity under the Singapore-IEA Regional Training Hub initiative, which was launched in 2016 when Singapore became an Association Country of the IEA. The programme represents a key milestone in establishing a network of energy professionals and urban practitioners to facilitate knowledge exchange and harness cities’ innovative and operational capabilities in clean energy transitions.

Singapore and the IEA will next co-host the 2nd Global Ministerial Conference on System Integration of Renewables on 27 October 2020, which is being held in conjunction with the 13th Singapore International Energy Week. The IEA’s new Electricity Security report will be launched at the Ministerial Conference.
The Biofuture Platform, a twenty-country, multi-stakeholder initiative, announced on the 12 August the launch of a set of voluntary principles. These are intended to offer guidance to governments and policymakers around the world on the need to promote the sustainable bioeconomy in both short-term relief packages and broader post-COVID economic recovery programs. The principles have the support of the twenty Biofuture Platform member countries, and were developed following consultations with policymakers, industry experts and international organisations.

The IEA is the Facilitator of the Biofuture Platform since February 2019. The Executive Director Dr. Fatih Birol commented on the development of the Principles: “Bioenergy is the overlooked giant of the renewable energy sector and will be paramount to a successful global energy transition. But its growth is currently not on track to meet sustainable development goals. It is critical that governments incorporate bioenergy in their COVID economic recovery plans, promoting jobs in the sector and ensuring its considerable potential does not remain untapped”.
The Clean Energy Transitions in Emerging Economies programme (CETEE) has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (H2020) under grant agreement No 952363. From 1 January 2020, the EU H2020 grant is funding work with ASEAN stakeholders, under the specific work stream on regulation, market design and investments, to assist in developing Multilateral Power Trade (MPT) in the region.

This work builds on the 2019 IEA and ASEAN report “Establishing Multilateral Power Trade in ASEAN” which was published with the support of the ASEAN-Australia Development Cooperation Program (AADCP) 2. This report was acknowledged at the 37th ASEAN Ministers on Energy Meeting (AMEM). In addition ASEAN stakeholders were tasked with bringing forward the minimum requirements for establishing multilateral power trade that the IEA recommended in the report.

The CETEE falls within the IEA’s broader Clean Energy Transitions Programme (CETP) and work on market design and regional integration continues with the efforts supporting the ASEAN community in establishing multilateral power trade. In that respect IEA is engaging closely with the ASEAN energy regulators network (AERN). In ASEAN the regulatory network is a relatively newly established body, and as such the regulatory network is assessing the different roles that they can play in relation to the establishment of multilateral power trade.

The IEA’s participation in the following AERN meetings was funded through the within the CETEE work stream on regulation, market design and investment:

5th meeting of the AERN Working Groups 1 and 2 held on July 28 2020

11th meeting of the ASEAN Energy Regulators’ Network on July 29 2020

At the meetings mentioned above Randi Kristiansen, Economics and Financial Analyst – Clean Electricity, participated on behalf of the IEA. In the meetings the IEA presented several contributions. Two key contributions were the following discussion papers, which were produced for ASEAN, as they are specific to the political context of ASEAN only.

Data and information sharing

Dispute resolution

The discussion papers take international experience and relate it to the specific circumstances of ASEAN, in order to provide input on how ASEAN can learn from international best practices on these topics, which are central to establishing MPT in the region.

The outcome of the AERN meeting on July 29th 2020 was that the IEA will continue to support AERN within the CETEE on three key topics

Guideline on grid code frameworks

Frameworks on data and information sharing

Frameworks on dispute resolution

All three topics follow-up on the minimum requirements that the IEA identified in the study “Establishing Multilateral Power Trade in ASEAN”, which are key areas that are needed in order for MPT to progress in the ASEAN region.

The IEA will also play a key partner in the information sharing and knowledge gathering of AERN on the wider topic of MPT. Knowledge exchange workshops with regulators from other regions will be organised, and workshop materials will be available on the CETEE webpage once the workshops have been facilitated.
The International Energy Agency and the Government of Iraq hosted a high-level Ministerial roundtable on Thursday on investment and economic reforms in Iraq, with a particular focus on the country’s electricity and gas sectors.

The virtual meeting brought together senior Iraqi Ministers and policymakers, Ministers from IEA countries, CEOs and leaders of energy companies as well as international financial institutions, who discussed how to ensure that Iraq’s energy sector can continue its recovery at a time of constrained government budgets and tighter financing environments.

Participants from the Government of Iraq included Mr. Ali Allawi, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance; Mr. Ihsan Ismaeel, the Minister of Oil; Mr. Majid Hantoush, the Minister of Electricity; and Ms. Suha Najjar, an advisor to the Prime Minister.

The roundtable also heard from several other top government officials, including Mr. Dan Brouillette, the U.S. Secretary of Energy; Mr Kwasi Kwarteng, Minister of State for Business, Energy and Clean Growth of the United Kingdom; Ambassador Francois Delattre, Secretary-General of France's Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs; as well as senior executives of Siemens Energy, GE Gas Power, Total, Eni, BP, Bechtel and Crescent Petroleum.

The discussions reviewed the role that the new Iraqi government sees for the private sector in developing the country’s electricity and natural gas sectors, as well as measures needed to spur investment by energy companies. The meeting followed a call in May between Iraq’s Prime Minister, Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, and the IEA’s Executive Director, Dr Fatih Birol, agreeing to work together, particularly in the area of electricity and gas reform.

“Iraq reforming its economy is not a matter for debate. It is essential, and it is vital that reforms are comprehensive and timely,” said Mr. Allawi. “The meeting today with the IEA highlighted the Government of Iraq's seriousness in its endeavour to fundamentally reform its economy, including the energy sector, which we want to be a driver of growth and development.”

“The IEA has been a steadfast supporter of Iraq’s reforms, and we are especially encouraged by the Government’s clear-sighted and comprehensive vision for economic development,” said Dr Birol. “The energy sector will be a crucial linchpin here – stable and affordable electricity can spur the private sector growth that Iraq needs to diversify. Iraq can continue to count on the IEA’s support in this area of the reform, and we want to encourage private investments and international public support to ensure its success.”

The meeting is the latest in a series of top-level engagements that the IEA has undertaken in support of the Government of Iraq in recent years. Last year, the IEA published an in-depth analysis of the country’s energy sector, examining the problems affecting Iraq’s power sector and offering recommendations to address the situation, including the potential role of renewables. The report, Iraq's Energy Sector: A Roadmap to a Brighter Future, also took a detailed look at the country’s oil and gas industry and its prospects for the next decade.

Since then, the drop in oil prices due to the Covid-19 pandemic has severely curtailed the government’s ability to spend on critical infrastructure. As a response to the economic and financial strain, the new government is exploring avenues to fundamentally reform its economy to reduce the burden on state finances, incentivise private sector growth, and make the economy more resilient to future oil price movements.
