A lease is an alternative method of acquiring the use of a vehicle. It is an ongoing financial arrangement whereby you (the lessee) sign a two-to four-year contract, drive the vehicle for the allotted time, return it to the lessor (the dealership) at the end of the lease, and either buy the car, enter into another lease for a new car, or walk away with no further obligation. Lease payments are generally lower than regular loan payments would be to finance the same vehicle. With loan financing, you retain ownership of the car after the final payment is made. When leasing, ownership of the vehicle remains with the lessor throughout and after the term of the lease, unless you choose to purchase it. Leasing, therefore, does not allow you to build ownership value, or equity, in the vehicle; it does, however, free you from the major expense of owning a newer car, which is depreciation.

Financers offer two types of leases: open-end and closed-end. An open-end lease requires you to pay any difference between the projected residual, or remaining, value of the vehicle and its actual market value at the end of the lease term. In other words, if the leased vehicle depreciates faster than anticipated, you’ll have to pay the difference between the expected value and the true market value at the end of the lease. The projected value of the vehicle is included in the lease agreement at inception. Open-end leases are still offered, but they have largely been replaced by closed-end leases.

Also known as a walkaway lease, the closed-end lease specifies the price at which you may, but are not compelled to, purchase the vehicle at the end of the lease. Since you don’t have to buy it, you can walk away from that vehicle and enter into another lease agreement for a new vehicle. A closed-end lease shifts the risk of overestimating the residual value of the vehicle onto the lessor, who agrees to absorb any losses that stem from rapid depreciation. You are, however, responsible for any above-normal mileage or wear. Some other facts that you should be aware of concerning leases are below.

You must normally have very good credit to qualify for a lease. A lease with a low down payment exposes the lessor to greater risk of substantial loss in the event of a default on the obligation.

Lease payments are established to provide a return on the lessor’s capital that’s invested in the leased vehicle. The lower the return that a lessor will accept, the more you’ll benefit from the lower lease payments.

Lessors normally charge a substantial penalty in the event that you decide to terminate the lease early. Therefore, only enter into a lease if you’re prepared to fulfill the terms completely.

Leases typically specify a maximum number of miles that the vehicle can be driven before excess-mileage charges begin to accrue. Generally, 15,000 annual miles are allowed. You can attempt to negotiate a higher limit if you expect to exceed the mileage allowance.

Although manufacturer defects and routine scheduled maintenance are normally covered, other costs of operating the vehicle (such as registration, insurance coverage and non-routine repairs) are yours to pay.

Most leases require a nonrefundable down payment, usually from $1,000 to $2,000, depending on the value of the vehicle. A security deposit, which is generally refundable, may also be required. Sales taxes, if applicable, are usually added to each lease payment.
If you are trying to secure financing for a start up business, you may need to look in a few choice locations.

1. SBA Loans

One of the most popular ways to secure financing is to get an SBA loan. The Small Business Administration is a government agency that guarantees small business loans. These loans are designed to help entrepreneurs get started with minimal out-of-pocket investments. They also have relaxed credit standards and competitive interest rates.

2. Venture Capital

If you have a good idea for business, you may be able to get private investors to provide you with venture capital. They will give you the money that you need, in return for a percentage of ownership in your company. While you may not like the idea of giving a part of your profits, it might be the best route for you to take because the influx of cash is usually good.

3. Peer-to-Peer Lending

There are also several peer-to-peer lending sites that you might want to investigate. These sites allow you to connect with individuals that have excess money to lend. These lenders will bid on your business and provide you with a competitive interest rate.

Can you get a start up business loan with bad credit?

If you are interested in a, you may be worried about a bad credit score preventing you from getting the financing you need. Even though having a good credit score can be helpful to this process, it is not necessarily essential. Typically, there are several loan programs that will work with people who have bad credit. For example, the Small Business Administration has a history of working with individuals who have questionable credit scores. You can also improve your chances of being approved if you have a substantial amount of collateral to offer in exchange for the loan.
Many people that are learning about estate planning commonly ask "What is probate?" Here are the basics of probate and how it works.

Probate

The term probate refers to the method of distribution of an individual's assets after they die. The estate will be taken before the local probate court and a judge will preside over the distribution of the assets.

Testate vs. Intestate

When the individual that passed away has a will, this is known as testate. The judge is going to then review the will and make sure that it is legitimate. As long as they do not see any problems with the well, they will usually uphold it and distribute the assets according to what the deceased had placed on the will.

If the individual did not have a will when they died, this is known as intestate. In this case, the court is going to appoint someone to handle the estate of the individual. They will collect all of the claims against the estate and use any assets to pay creditors. At that point, the judge is going to refer to personal experience as well as state law and order to determine the best way to distribute the assets of the deceased.

Does all property have to be probated when a person dies?

Not all property has to be probated when an individual dies. There are many different types of assets that can be considered non-probate assets. For example, if you set up a trust, the assets you put into it will avoid the probate process. If you own property jointly with another individual through joint tenancy, the property can pass to the survivor without having to go through probate. You can also set up payable-on-death accounts, which will allow the money in the accounts to pass to the beneficiaries immediately when you die without going through probate.
A franchise typically starts as a single business. It may be a restaurant, hair salon, fitness center or even an insurance company. The business owner determines that the business is successful enough to open a second location, but he or she does not want to open the location directly. Instead, the owner sells the opportunity to do so to a franchisee.

Many well-known and popular establishments, including but not limited to fast food restaurants, frozen yogurt shops and hardware stores, are part of franchises. Entrepreneurs who would like to own a business but would prefer not to start one from scratch can purchase a franchise directly from the corporate headquarters. They will receive the backing of a large corporate presence, but they will still own their own businesses.

Purchasing a Franchise

To purchase a franchise, the applicant must have sufficient financial resources and business experience. The franchise as a whole will suffer if one location is not up to par or goes out of business. In order to maintain consistency across multiple locations and continue to develop a strong brand, franchise owners are very strict about the regulations and rules for owning and operating one of their franchises.

Can I own more than one franchise?

Whether you can own more than one franchise will depend on the rules of that particular franchise. Typically, most franchises both allow and encourage this type of behavior. It is not uncommon to meet a business owner whose goal is to continually open new locations of a single franchise in districts where he or she determines that there can be a large profit. However, some franchises restrict activity due to their own standards and distinct goals. Read the franchisee materials for a particular corporation to discover if owning multiple franchises will be restricted.

How does a franchise chain start?

A franchise chain typically starts with a single business owner at a single location. Often, the owner has the goal of franchising the business in the future. However, it is also common for the owner to simply desire a profitable business. Once that owner determines that the business model is sound and a second location can be added, the owner will have to determine whether he or she would like to also own that second location or sell the rights to open the location to another person. If he or she decides to franchise, the business model will be solidified so a franchise can be built.

How much does a franchise cost?

The franchise cost of any chain will depend on the predicted profits, the location and the support of the corporation at large. A very profitable franchise, such as a large, well-known hardware store, may cost upwards of several hundreds of thousands of dollars. On the contrary, purchasing a franchise of a small tutoring company with moderate profits may cost only $20,000 to $30,000. The level of support offered at the corporate level will also affect price. For example, an independent insurance office is notoriously very entrepreneurial, meaning that the individual franchise owner has a lot of control. This may be less costly than a chain whose corporation provides more support.

Which states are franchise registration states?

In a franchise registration state, the state must register and approve all franchise documents prior to sale of any franchise. These states include:

California

Hawaii

Illinois

Indiana

Maryland

Michigan

Minnesota

North Dakota

New York

Oregon

Rhode Island

South Dakota

Virginia

Washington

Wisconsin

If you are selling a franchise anywhere in the state, these documents must be registered prior to sale. Previously, the FCC set a national requirement that you disclose your franchise documents to potential franchisees at your initial meeting. This is no longer a requirement. If you are selling a franchise across state boundaries, unique regulations may apply based on the laws of each state. Ensure you have fully researched and complied with these regulations prior to finalizing a sale.

What kinds of businesses can be franchised?

Nearly any type of business can be franchised, but most franchises are retail establishments. For example, coffee shops, yogurt shops, clothing stores, restaurants and hardware stores are commonly franchised. Beyond retail franchises, the International Franchise Association has a list of categories of potential franchise industries such as senior care, energy, truck and ATM businesses. Retail businesses tend to be the easiest business models to copy, which makes them good options for franchising. However, even complicated business models can be replicated effectively. Varying levels of control can be afforded to business owners looking for entrepreneurial opportunities.
You are eligible for military reserve pay if you served in the National Guard or Reserve once you reach age 60. However, not all individual service members will qualify. Your qualification depends on your years of service, type of service and when you served. The formulas for computing how much you may be eligible are complicated. Here is a basic list of the factors the pay is based on.

Years of Service

You must serve at least 20 years prior to becoming eligible for military reserve retirement pay. A qualified year is one in which a service member earned at least 60 active points or 75 inactive points. You are eligible to earn one point for each day of service in the Reserves or National Guard, up to 365. In leap years, you will need to have 366 days per year. At least eight years must be served as a member of the Active Reserve. This was changed in 2002 when the active requirement reduced to only six years. You will additionally only be required to serve six active years if the years of service were between October 5, 1994, and September 30, 2001.

Early Retirement Options

As of 2009, there is a new early retirement option in place. In this system, you may be able to retire as early as age 50. You can reduce your minimum retirement age. The new provision only applies to new active duty service after the provision was passed; this starts on January 28, 2008. The maximum reduction is 10 years, so you will not be able to retire before the age of 50, regardless of your total number of years of active duty service. Further, just because you receive retirement benefits does not mean you will qualify for health benefits. You must still wait until the age 60 to meet that qualification.

Calculating Retirement Benefits

The military uses a formula to calculate how much you will receive in benefits. The formula can become quite complicated with several provisions now in place, but the basis is still simple. Calculate the total number of years of service you gain credit for by dividing your total retirement credits by 360. There are two basic formulas to calculate your benefits from here. One is called the "Final Basic Pay" formula, and the other is the "High 3 Formula."

If you entered the service prior to September 8, 1980, use the final basic pay formula to calculate benefits. Multiple your years of service, found in step one, by 2.5 percent. Do this up to a maximum of 75 percent, then multiply the result by the basic pay you were receiving at the end of your career.

If you entered the service after September 8, 1980, use the High 3 formula. Multiply your years of service, found in step one, by 2.5 percent. Do this up to a maximum of 75 percent, then multiply the result by the average of the highest three years of pay you received while serving.

Military Reserve Retirement Pay Eligibility

In order to be eligible for military reserve pay, you must have at least 20 years of service to the National Guard or the Reserves. At least eight of these years must be active reserve years. A year of service is any year when you earned at least 60 active duty retirement credits, or 75 inactive duty credits. You earn one credit for each day of service. Once you have accumulated 20 years of credit and are at least 60 years old, you can begin to collect pay. You may be eligible for early retirement based on the year you entered service and how many active duty years you served.

Military Reserve Retirement Pay Systems

Military reserve pay is based on a calculation of the retirement point system. You earn one point per day of service in the military, up to 365 points per year. Your total points earned is divided by 360 at the end of your career to determine how many qualified years you served. Once you know your qualified years, you will use either the final basic pay or high-three system to calculate your pay. Final basic pay is used if you entered the service prior to September 8, 1980. The high three is used afterward. In both scenarios, you multiply your qualified years by 2.5 percent, with a 75 percent max. Then, use this percentage times your end pay. Or, average the highest 36 months pay in order to determine your benefit.

Formulas for Computing Reserve Retired Pay

Reserve retired pay is calculated based on one of two formulas depending on the year you entered service. If you entered prior to September 8, 1980, you will use the final pay formula. If you entered after this day, you will use the High-3 formula. In both options, you first determine your qualified years of service by dividing your total number of retirement credits by 360.Then, multiply this formula by 2.5 percent per year up to 75 percent.

If you are on the final pay formula, multiply the total by either. Or, if you are on the High-3 formula, average of the highest 36 months of your pay.
Life estate deeds give an individual the right to enjoy all benefits of ownership of property while they are alive. As soon as the individual dies, the life estate ends, and ownership benefits seamlessly pass onto the remainder person on the estate. This tool is often used in estate planning to make sure a home is effectively transferred to a child.

For example, John wants to pass his home onto John, Jr. He wants to avoid probate and lawsuits in doing this after his death. As such, he passes the home onto John, Jr., today. However, John needs to live in the home for the time being. He establishes a life estate deed. This allows him to live in the home and gain all the benefits, and costs, of home ownership until the day of his death. At that point, John's life estate expires. John, Jr., does not have to inherit the house through an estate. Instead, he is already the named owner of the home, and he can begin receiving ownership benefits immediately.

Can a life estate deed once given be revoked or withdrawn?

Once a contract for a life estate deed has been signed, it is difficult to revoke it. The parties listed in the contract would have to initiate the revocation because they are the lawful owners of the property. Another withdrawal option is to determine the parties were not in a sound legal mind or committed fraud when the contract was signed. This is very difficult to prove. Most cases involve a lengthy lawsuit and very expensive legal costs because life estate deeds are carefully drawn and executed.
Online banks have been growing in popularity in recent years. Many people are forgoing the traditional brick-and-mortar banks in order to take advantage of some of the benefits that online banks have to offer. Here are a few things to consider about online banks and what features you can receive by working with them.

Instant Account Access

One common feature that you will find with all online banks is that you can access your account instantly. You will be able to get online any computer and login to your bank account. This will allow you to see a much money you have, what payments you have received, and what checks have cleared. Many online banks also make it possible for you to access your account from any PDA or cell phone. This provides you with a level of convenience that can be very beneficial to you.

Safety

Another benefit that you can get by working with an online bank is safety. Many people believe that it is not safe to do all of your business online with this type of bank. However, many people would also argue that this is actually safer than the traditional alternative. With a regular bank, you are going to receive paper statements and copies of cancelled checks. This is one of the easiest ways for identity thieves to get your information. They can simply look in your trash and find a copy of your bank statement. However, with online banks, everything can be conducted online. You are not going to have to worry about shredding your documents or anyone finding your cancelled checks. Because of this, your bank account is going to be very safe.

No Fees

One of the best things about online banks is that many of them do not charge fees. You could potentially get a checking account that allows you to pay all your bills online and you will not have to pay any fees to the bank. Some of them do not even have fees for bounced checks.

Check Images

When you are working with an online bank, you should also be able to get access to images of the checks that you have written. This way, instead of seeing simply an amount and a check number, you will actually be able to see a picture of the check that you wrote. Many times, this can jog your memory if you forgot to write down the information off of the check that you wrote.

Transfers

Another benefit that you can get from online banks is that you can transfer money to other accounts. This allows you to link up to another bank account from a bank that is located in your local area. This way, if you need to deposit cash, you can take it to your local bank and then transfer the money to your online bank quickly. You will also be able to easily transfer money to an investment account or some other type of account that you have.

Thrift Bank

A thrift bank is a type of banking institution that is generally smaller than a full-service bank. The thrift bank puts an emphasis on taking deposits from customers and using that money to issue mortgages. The money from the mortgage interest that is generated is used to provide interest to the depositors of the bank. Although this is the basic business model of the thrift bank, some thrift banks have expanded to offer additional features such as checking accounts. This is a type of banking that has been around for many years and is also known as a "savings and loan."
If you are considering purchasing separate car insurance as a teenager, you should be aware of the positives and negatives this option offers when compared to staying on your parents' plan. For the most part, there are relatively few benefits to obtaining your own insurance. However, if your goal is to set yourself up for benefits in the future, obtaining your own plan can be worth the added cost and hassle.

Con: Difficulty Obtaining Insurance

Teen drivers are statistically the most dangerous on the road. There are a number of factors that lead to this statistic, including the fact that teen drivers are inexperienced and more likely to be distracted. Because of these problems, car insurance companies like to tie a teen driver into a plan with his or her parents. The philosophy behind this step is simple: insurance companies feel drivers are more likely to be cautious if they are responsible to their parents. Further, car insurance companies cannot exist by insuring only risky drivers. Instead, they must have a balance of good drivers and risky drivers. It is easier for an insurance company to supply coverage to a teen if there is another, less risky driver also on the plan.

Con: Expense

If you do succeed in finding a carrier to provide your car insurance, you should be aware of high costs. As a rule, car insurance companies raise costs and keep them high for any driver under the age of 25. Aside from this factor, you will be missing out on the advantages of grouping. Your parents are aware that paying for two cars to be insured on one plan is cheaper than paying for two plans. You will miss this benefit entirely, and you will end up paying substantially more to be on your own plan than you would simply reimbursing your parents.

Pro: Build Your Credit

One positive result of having your own car insurance at a young age is the ability to establish a payment history for yourself. Paying to insure your own car is a big financial step. It is something many individuals do not do until several years later in life. Starting early can help you build your credibility so you will be eligible for other opportunities at a young age. For example, you may find that you can obtain lower renter's insurance costs if you have been paying your own car insurance for years.

Pro: Reduce Future Costs

When you are on your parents' plan, your parents will benefit from your good driving record. The account as a whole will maintain a positive balance. After that, when you do eventually obtain your own insurance, you will still have no payment record and no history of credits versus debits to an insurance account. On the contrary, if you start young with your own insurance, you will establish a record early. You can then benefit from car insurance savings later in life that may at least partly offset the expense you took on as a teen.

How can I get my own auto insurance as a teenager?

If you wish to obtain your own auto insurance policy as a teenager, you will have to shop around for insurance companies willing to extend you a policy. Teen drivers are the costliest to insure, and many insurance companies would prefer to keep you on a plan with your parents. Research auto insurers that offer specific lines for new drivers. You can still expect to pay more than you would if you shared a plan with your parents. However, you can ask for discounts if you own your vehicle in your name, have a job or routinely get good grades in school.

Why is car insurance for teenagers so expensive?

Car insurance for teenagers is the most expensive type of auto insurance to secure. The expense comes from the fact that teen drivers make more claims than other groups of people. Insurance companies must charge more based on these statistics. The high charges are intended to make sure that the insurance company can afford anticipated claims from a teen driver. In order to reduce your insurance costs as a teen, stay on your parents' plans, look for good student discounts and take a safe driver class. Many insurance companies offer large discounts to teens who have gone to driving schools prior to getting their licenses.

Are there any ways to get cheap car insurance for teenagers?

There is no real option for cheap car insurance for teenagers. However, there are some discounts you may be able to take advantage of. First, it is best to group a teen driver's plan with his or her parents' plan. Then, ask about good student discounts. Most insurance companies will provide at least a small discount for students getting good grades in school since these individuals are likely to be safer drivers. Be sure to have a teenager take a safe or defensive driving class prior to getting a license. Turn in forms from these classes, such as those offered at the Department of Motor Vehicles, for a discount.

What is good student car insurance?

Good student car insurance offers a discount to teen drivers with good grades. Many insurance companies offer this discount. The driver simply submits copies of school records or report cards in order to receive the benefit. Insurance companies use demographic research to determine how much they should charge. They have discovered that students with good grades tend to have fewer claims than those not performing well in school. As a result, they reward those students with good grades with lower rates. The insurance system as a whole operates with this type of reward system. For example, individuals who are married or have children may also be eligible for discounts.
An insolvent estate is an estate in bankruptcy. When the owner of the estate passed,they left behind a greater amount of debt than equity. This means the estate must be sold off in order to repay debts, but there may still be outstanding debts to pay. Depending on the structure of the debts, the inheritors of the estate may be asked to repay the loans. A judge will work to cancel or reduce debts in most cases in order to repay all outstanding balances with money earned from liquidating the estate.

Disadvantages of Using a Probate for an Insolvent Estate

If you decide to take an insolvent estate through probate, you will have the protection of the court each step of the way. This is the main reason beneficiaries decide to take the probate route to resolve an insolvent estate. However, the protection comes at a cost. You will likely find yourself deep in debt to attorneys and the court at the end of an insolvent estate probate process because the costs are only exacerbated by the insolvency.

No Nonintervention Powers

When you enter probate on a solvent estate, you have the power to ask for nonintervention of the court on certain issues. This allows you to resolve some debts on your own simply by repaying creditors out of the estate. You will save money by handling issues on your own. When an estate is insolvent, most jurisdictions will not permit nonintervention.

This means every single transaction must be run through the court. Similar to a bankruptcy proceeding, a probate on an insolvent estate freezes the assets and lets the court decide how to spend the money left behind. You will find yourself at the mercy of the court in even the smallest transaction, which can consume your time and money.

Insufficient Assets to Pay for Attorney

In probate, the attorney and court fees to resolve an insolvent estate are paid out of the estate. The attorney is paid first, and the remainder of the estate goes to pay off creditors. The creditors’ shares of the pot shrink as attorney fees go up. In some cases, the attorney fees may climb so high that nothing is left for the creditors.

Insufficient funds can be a problem in small estates where only a few thousand dollars are left to repay debts, even if the debts are small. Attorney fees will quickly eat up those few thousand dollars. You will be left with few options. One is to handle the probate and try to handle the debts on your own. The other is to enter probate and pay attorney fees out of pocket.

Time to Resolve Disputes

When you handle dispute resolution on an insolvent estate yourself, you can move at your own pace. You decide which creditors to engage first, and you decide which assets to liquidate immediately. You hand all of this over to the court when you enter probate. The court will then establish it’s timeline. This may, or may not, work with your goals to end the process quickly. Probate can take years to resolve an insolvent estate. While this time is daunting and the cost can be high, you should also keep in mind the alternative. If you decide to “go it alone” on resolving the issue, you lose the protection of the court. It can take just as long for you to personally verify and repay all debts as it would take the court. Do not let time be the reason to avoid probate, instead keep in mind it can be a serious disadvantage to go through the court system.

Alternatives for Handling Insolvent Estates

An insolvent estate does not have enough assets to cover liabilities at the time of the decedent’s death. As a result, the beneficiaries of the estate will inherent nothing. It is up to the beneficiaries to determine how the insolvency will be resolved. There is no correct way to handle the process, and each individual will have to choose based on the circumstances of the individual estate in question. The size of the estate, the types of debts remaining and the resources of the beneficiary will all come into play.

Choose Based on the Estate Size

For a relatively small estate, with only a few thousand dollars in assets at the time of death, the best method will be to either ignore the liabilities or to close them personally. As a beneficiary, you have no actual obligation to ensure debts are paid. You are not named on the debts, and the credit of the decedent will have no impact on you. This will not stop creditors from contacting you, however, so it may be best to resolve the estate personally.

You can liquidate the assets in the estate and repay the creditors a portion of the remaining cash equivalent to the portion of debt the decedent owed the creditor. If you were to move through probate, it is unlikely the estate would have enough cash to pay an attorney and still repay creditors, and you may be stuck with the bill. For a larger estate, probate may be a better option. By putting the estate in probate, you can remove yourself from personally making any decisions. The assets of the estate are liquidated, and attorney and court fees are paid out of this sum. Then, the remaining cash is used to repay creditors.

Choose Based on Types of Debts

If the debts in an insolvent estate are largely secured, it may be easy to resolve the debts by surrendering the collateral. You can carry out the process of voluntarily surrendering the assets, resolving the debts one by one. However, if the debts are largely unsecured, it will be harder to pay them off by surrendering collateral. Instead, you would have to liquidate each asset yourself, collecting the cash earned and repaying creditors personally. In this instance, entering probate may be a better option. The court can handle the liquidation process for you, and the court will determine how to negotiate repayment.

Choose Based on Personal Resources

If you have limited resources to handle the dissolution of an estate, it is best to avoid probate. Probate always runs the risk of resulting in legal fees. Without the cash to pay, probate is not a good option to you. However, if you have the cash on hand to cover this expense, probate can save you a lot of time and hassle. In the end, you may owe nothing at all.

Procedures for Handling Debts in Insolvent Estates

Insolvent estates are those where the decedent’s assets are not sufficient to cover debts after death. As a result, there will be no inheritance left to the beneficiaries of the estate, and those beneficiaries may further have a legal obligation to help resolve the debts. Thankfully, less than 10 percent of all estates are insolvent, so it is not likely you will have to face the problem. If you do, however, there are three main ways to handle debts in an insolvent estate.

Ignore the Problem

While creditors may try to convince you otherwise, in most states you have no obligation to meet the debts incurred by a decedent’s estate. The creditors can try to recover by contacting you or the court, but you have inherited none of the estate if it is insolvent, so you are not legally obligated to any of the property or the debts. The effectiveness of this strategy may partly depend on your state of residence and whether you inherited any property while the decedent was living. You may want to consult an attorney to learn if the creditors could attempt to contact you in any way and what rights you have if they do.

Handle the Debts Personally

If you have received the entire estate and found it to be insolvent, you may personally attempt to resolve debts. You can contact each creditor to verify debts owed and offer to surrender assets, to resolve those debts. This strategy can be time consuming. Furthermore, many creditors will attempt to take advantage of you in this situation. They are aware you are not the original debtor, so they may attempt to assess fees and charges against the estate and claim these charges were part of the original contract.

If you are not careful to follow the contracts and verify all debts, then you can end up paying more than is legally necessary for each debt. Always start by verifying all debts, assuring none are past the statute of limitations and knowing the legal obligation the estate has to repay any of the debts prior to negotiating with creditors.

Use Probate for the Debts

You may want to enter probate in order to resolve the debts. The main advantage of this is you have a court system to assure all debts are lawful and you are not overpaying. The court will work to reduce the total debts owed so the estate can cover it’s liabilities. Unfortunately, however, the court does not recognize your legal rights. As the beneficiary, you will not have the ability to handle any debts personally. Every single debt must go through the court, which can drive up court costs and probate expenses. Probate can be a very expensive process and this can add to the overall expenses of the estate itself.
Stock warrants are similar to options because they give an investor the option to purchase a share of stock at a given price at some point in the future. The true difference between a warrant and an option is the issuer. An option is issued by the market exchange; a warrant is issued by the company offering the stock.

Why Offer Warrants?

Companies offer warrants on their shares when they want to boost investor confidence. They are predicting the value of their stock will go up; if it does, then investors will have greater confidence in the stock in the future. For this reason, warrants are often issued at the same time a company issues a new stock.

Why Buy Warrants?

As an investor, you have the opportunity to earn a very high return on investment with warrants. Warrants are high risk, high reward certificates that are transferable and sellable. This makes them very flexible, and they can be attractive to investors. They are popular with hedge funds and strategists as well.

How do you exercise a stock warrant?

A stock warrant is always issued with an exercise date and price. American warrants can be exercised any time before the exercise date at the exercise price. With European warrants, you can only exercise the warrant on the exact exercise date. When you exercise a warrant, you can notify your broker or the issuing company with either your put or call order. Warrants are issued directly by companies. As a result, when you exercise the document, the company will be the one that issues you the shares directly.
Bequests are a method for giving property to an individual or organization after your death. You can state your intention to bequeath property in your will, or you can bequeath the property while you are living. Most commonly, property is transferred in a will and is required to go through probate before it is distributed. The tax benefits are usually more favorable than other gifting options.

Charitable Bequests

Charitable bequests are popular because they offer flexibility and have few tax consequences. If you bequeath property to charity, you will receive a tax deduction. You can bequeath the property while you are alive, retain use of the property and hand it over upon your death.

Giver's Tax Liability

Anytime an individual gives a piece of property, there will be tax obligations applied to the transfer. There are two types of tax consequences. First, there is a possible estate tax on the property. The estate tax is constantly under reform. As of 2010, the estate tax remains at 35 percent, but it is only charged for very large estates. An individual leaving $5 million, or a couple leaving $10 million, will have an estate tax charged to their property. If the property is worth less than this amount, an estate tax will not be assessed.

However, there may be a capital gains tax on a property that is transferred, if the value has increased. For example, if you purchase a home for $200,000 and it is worth $300,000 when you transfer it, you are required to pay taxes on the $100,000 difference. Capital gains taxes are due and can be paid by the giver or the receiver. In either case, the cost basis is the original owner's cost basis.

Receiver's Tax Liability

A receiver does not pay income tax on any property received through bequest. Property acquired by inheritance does not count as income. Keep in mind, however, that you are required to pay estate or capital gains taxes as described above. There are a few steps you should take in order to determine your tax liability. First, determine if you owe an estate tax on the property based on its nominal value. Then, if you are receiving an asset that has changed in value, you may have to declare a capital gain or capital loss at the time of the asset's sale. You will not have to pay a capital gains tax until the gain is realized.

This means, for example, you can hold a property without paying taxes. However, you must pay the taxes in the year you sell that property for a profit. There are relatively low tax rules applied to bequests. For this reason, many individuals find that a bequest is the best option for a property transfer. You can use an attorney to help you draw up the proper forms and explain the specific rules of your tax consequences. Always cross check the information that you are given with a tax authority because attorneys are not always well versed in tax laws unless they specialize in that area of law.

What are charitable bequests?

Charitable bequests are one way to donate property to charity. When you bequest property, you are giving it as a gift. Both you, and the recipient, receive favorable tax consequences as a result. You can donate property either while you are alive or through your will. If you decide to bequest while you are living, you can use the property for the remainder of your lifetime before turning it over to the charitable organization. This flexible structure makes bequests easy to manage. Many individuals prefer to use this method instead of allowing property to go into probate after death.
If you donate funds to a nonprofit organization during a given year, you are eligible for a charitable donation tax deduction on your tax return. In order to receive this deduction, though, you must follow the IRS procedures to file it appropriately. You will claim the deduction on your Form 1040, Schedule A. There is a specific line for you to input your deduction. If you are completing your taxes online, you will be prompted when it is time to enter your deduction.

Charitable Contribution Deduction Rules

You must donate cash or property. If you pledge funds, you do not receive a deduction until you have fulfilled that pledge. For example, pledging $20 a month to your public radio network does not mean you get a deduction of $480 that year. You have to provide information on what you have actually given.

You must be giving the funds to a tax-exempt organization. Tax deductible charity organizations must have 501(c)(3) status.

You must be able to itemize your deductions. If you do not plan on itemizing your deductions this year, then you cannot capitalize on the deductions you have made through charitable contributions.

You have to keep your records. For example, if you have received a charitable donation appraisal on property you donated, you need to have this appraisal on-hand come tax time.

Record Keeping

You must keep written records of all donations to charity, including tax donations. If you are giving a sum larger than $250 on one donation, then you will need supporting documentation in order to receive the benefits. You should even keep records of any cash donations. To ensure your records qualify, keep the following:

The name of the organization - if you have the organization's tax payer identification, keep this as well

The date of your contribution

The amount of your contribution

Property Contributions

If you are not donating money, you may be able to receive a charitable deduction for donation of property. You must be able to prove the market value of the property you donated if you intend on itemizing the deduction. You need the following in this case:

An appraisal form stating the fair market value of your item - If you are not having the item appraised, you may not need this form, but the IRS can question your determined fair market amount if it is unsubstantiated with an appraisal. If your donation is more than $5,000, you need an appraisal or it will not stand up to the scrutiny of the IRS.

IRS Form 8283 is required for a single non-cash contribution of over $500.

If you are donating a vehicle, and the vehicle is worth more than $500, you need a written statement from the organization you donated the vehicle to and an appraisal of value.

Charitable Donation Limits

There is what is called a 50/30/20 deduction limit on all charitable donations. This means the following:

The limit for cash contributions to charity is 50% of your adjusted gross income

The limit for property contributions is 30% of your adjusted gross income

You can deduct contributions of capital gains assets up to 20% of your adjusted gross income.







Can you get tax back for charity work?







You cannot deduct the value of time spent on a project as a charitable donation tax deduction. For example, if you are a carpenter, you may devote a weekend to building for Habitat for Humanity. The time you spend on the project cannot be deducted at your normal hourly rate. However, any out-of-pocket expenses you incur during that period can be deducted. This includes wear and tear on your machinery, nails and supplies, and even lunches or the gas for driving time to and from the location. Any expense made during the time you are working can be deducted if it is directly related to the charity activity or event.







What's the charitable contribution cap on donated autos?







If you donate a vehicle, you are eligible for a charitable donation tax deduction. You cannot deduct more than 50 percent of your taxable income, regardless of the type of donation. There is a standard $500 deduction for the donation of a vehicle. You may be eligible to deduct more if

you provide a statement showing you did not receive a good or service in return

you did receive a service in return and provide a statement showing that service was made up entirely of intangible religious benefits, if that was the case

You can then deduct a value up to the amount the charity sold the vehicle for.
SEP IRA rules allow for any company that is incorporated or unincorporated with one or more full-time employees to set up a qualified retirement plan. The employer is the sole contributor to the plan, and the employer may be a sole proprietor, partnership, LLC, Subchapter S or C corporation. This opens up the SEP plan to a wide array of companies as long as an eligible employee is present.

Employee Eligibility

All eligible employees must be at least 21 years old, have three years of service in the past five years and have earned at least $450 in compensation from the employer. In general, these rules are in place to exclude one-time independent contractors or temporary employees from receiving benefits in the plan. However, part-time employees are eligible as long as they meet the $450 minimum and have worked at least 3 years in the past 5 years. To determine employee eligibility, an employer fills out an IRS Form 5305.

Spousal and Family Eligibility

The SEP IRA program can benefit companies employing family members. The employer must immediately vest the same percentage of income as he or she is receiving as the business owner into an IRA account for all participants, including family members. Since the rules are extremely equal, there is no favoritism for family members employed in the company. This can be expensive for an employer since the employer is the only contributor. When the recipient of the funds is a spouse or child, however, the tax deductible expense may be easier to stomach.

Benefits of SEP IRA Rules

The SEP IRA is most beneficial to an individual with a very small business since it is costly per employee. The business owner should have a desire to contribute to his or her own IRA as well as those of his or her partners and direct employees. Since the owner must contribute the same amount to his or her account as to the employees’ accounts, it is important the employer is prepared to take on this expense. For this reason, the SEP IRA is popular in partnerships, family-owned businesses and sole proprietorships. The low level of forms required makes the plan cheap to administer even if it requires high annual contributions from the employer.

Downsides of SEP IRA Rules

The main drawback of the SEP IRA is the fact that an employer must compensate all employees equally. If one employee is outperforming another or has been more loyal to the company, no additional IRA funds can be contributed on that employee’s behalf. This removes the ability for an employer to offer retirement funds as an incentive for employee performance or loyalty. Further, the SEP IRA is not a good option for a growing business. The unique circumstances provided by an SEP IRA are truly best for a very small operation, and the business will quickly incur too much expense if it continues to grow beyond a low number of current employees.

Will a new employee be eligible for an SEP IRA?

A new employee will not immediately be eligible for an SEP IRA. SEP IRA requirements clearly state that an employee must have at least three years of service to the organization in the past five years. In addition, the employee must earn at least $450 from the employer in the given year to be eligible. These restrictions make it impossible to extend an SEP IRA immediately to a new hire. However, the individual may set up his or her own IRA account and roll the plan over into the company's IRA plan in the future.

Can I open an SEP IRA for myself if I am the only employee of my business?

If you run a sole proprietorship, you are eligible to open an SEP IRA. In fact, the SEP IRA plan is most beneficial for extremely small businesses. Under this plan, the owner of the business must contribute the same amount to an employee's IRA plan as he or she does to the owner's account. This means all employees, regardless of level of management or time with the company, will receive the same contribution amount annually. This makes the SEP IRA most feasible for a single-employee company or a partnership. Individuals who employ family members may also favor this plan.
What is Cash flow? Cash flow is the common business term used to describe the amount of cash revenue a business, institution or other enterprise takes in versus its expenses. ("Cash" here is understood to include bank deposits, transfers and debits.) Every wise cash management policy should prioritize cash flow. A positive cash flow ratio is considered the essential indicator of any operation's ongoing viability.

More Important than Making a Profit



It's possible for a business to demonstrate profitability on paper without having positive cash flow, as profitability is defined as the difference between the cost of producing something and the price for which it's sold. A company can be profitable and not generate enough cash to cover its operating expenses and debt. While any business can experience a restricted period of time with a negative cash flow, cash flow needs to be consistently positive over the long run for a business to be considered financially healthy. Investors, shareholders, lenders, and even potential employees all have a stake in a company's long term financial stability.

Carefully Monitored

Cash flow is generally analyzed over specific, limited time increments, such as monthly, quarterly (over the course of a year) or yearly. Some businesses manage negative cash flow by requesting a short-term line of credit from the bank to tide them over during cash shortfalls, but this can be difficult to obtain for smaller businesses, particularly during economic downturns.


Borrowing against your 401k should only be considered as a last resort loan option. Other forms of private loans will be more financially beneficial to you. However, if you are unable to get funding from another source and are in immediate need, some employers will allow you to borrow from your 401k fund. These loans are very different than other loans. You are basically making a withdrawal from your account and then paying the funds back later.

Advantages

The main advantage of borrowing from a 401k is you are essentially borrowing from yourself. This means you do not have to undergo the same screening process you receive when you are borrowing from another lender. Most people who consider borrowing from a 401k have bad credit, leading them to this option. You will be able to borrow up to 50% of the monies you have fully-vested. This can amount to a very large loan without any credit check, a down payment or collateral.

Loan Limits

You can only borrow up to 50% of vested funds. This can be tricky for some people who do not understand the contribution process. When you contribute funds automatically in each paycheck, the funds hit the account very quickly. It is against the law for your employer to wait to deposit the contributions you have individually made. All contributions must be deposited within the 15th business day in the month following your contribution.

However, many people are confused by the fact the employer does not have to immediately match the contribution. Many employers have a quarterly deposit schedule for their matches. You may only borrow against the sum that is fully vested at the time your contract is complete.

Loan Terms

First, it is necessary to understand most loans must be repaid within 5 years of the initial loan. If you fail to meet this requirement, you may be penalized for an unscheduled withdrawal from your 401k. This is a 10% penalty on the funds if they have been taken out prior to the time you are 59 1/2 years of age. These loans also cost more than just their interest rates. While the funds are on loan to you, they are not earning interest in the account. Further, you cannot make the withdraw for any type of purchase. The loans can only be taken to pay for a home purchase or student loans. You cannot simply pay off other debts with a 401k loan.

Tax Penalties

You will have to pay taxes on your loan amount when you receive it. Since your funds are not taxed when they are contributed, they have to be taxed on the back end. The tax rate is typically around 20% for most Americans. This means borrowing from your 401k can be exceedingly expensive in real dollars. It is a better option to consider a high risk personal loan rather than using this option. You may be tempted to use this option now, but you will pay for it in the future when you go to retire.

Are you allowed to borrow from your 401k if you are not fully vested?

You can borrow fully vested funds only when you are borrowing against your 401k. If you have made deposits through your regularly occurring paycheck, the funds are immediately fully vested, and there is nothing to be concerned about. However, your employer's match may not be funded immediately. In this case, you can borrow those funds only once they do hit your account. At any given point, you may contact your 401k administrator to learn the amount you have fully vested in your account. You can then borrow up to 50 percent of this sum if your employer permits 401k loans.

If you borrow against your 401k, does that show on a credit report?

If you are borrowing against your 401k, the loan is not reported to the credit bureaus. You are technically borrowing money from yourself, and no lending agency is extending the financing. On the one hand, this sounds like a great option, but on the other, there are many credit drawbacks to the loans as well. Since they are never reported, they do not help build your credit score. For example, you can borrow from your 401k to pay for college tuition for yourself and a dependent. However, if you qualify for a federal student loan, you will receive low interest rates, and you will build your credit in the process.
Any retirement funds are considered communal property in a divorce. This means each party has equal entitlement to the funds, regardless of who contributed, in a state that uses communal property laws. Most states do use this system of asset division, but some divide down the middle, while others use a different system. First, find out the communal property laws in your state, and then consider the options you have to resolve retirement fund disputes.

Types of Retirement Funds

The type of retirement fund you have contributed to will affect the property laws it falls under. Nearly all forms of funds are considered communal, including IRAs, 401(k)s, ERISA funds, military and veteran’s benefits, and stock options. The few funds that do not go into communal property division include Social Security benefits, compensation for on-the-job or military injury, and railroad retirement benefits. Using this information, determine which of your accounts will be allocated to both parties in a divorce.

Options to Settle Property

There are two primary options to settle the division of communal retirement funds. The first is to offer a present-day valuation to one spouse. In this scenario, the spouse keeping the retirement plan offers a buy-out of the other spouse’s portion. The buy-out is calculated at the present-day value of the spouse’s share of the fund. The asset can be in any form, including cash, stocks or property. Both parties must agree to this option prior to settling the account in court. A second option is to divide the retirement fund into two accounts. In this case, the spouse holding the fund will see a reduction of his or her savings by a proportion equal to the state law, typically 50 percent. The spouse not on the plan will set up an individual account and receive 50 percent of the funds immediately. In this option, it is critical to assure you do not take on any penalties as a result of the split. For example, follow regulations to be forgiven any potential early distribution penalties from the account split. As the receiving party, you need to set up a tax deferred account equal to that you are receiving funds from in order to avoid immediate tax implications.

Non-Division of Assets

If you feel your spouse has no legal claim on your retirement benefits, you will have to fight to secure non-division of the assets. The most prevalent reason for this type of case would be the presence of a pre or post-nuptial agreement. If you have an agreement, you may have agreed to keep retirement accounts separate in the case of divorce. You may also be able to keep the account if your contributions occurred prior to marriage. In this case, they may not be considered communal property, depending on the laws of your state. In the absence of an agreement, however, this exception can be difficult to obtain. It is preferable to enter an agreement early in your marriage if you determine your retirement plan is worth significantly more than your spouse’s at the time of marriage.

Are retirement funds transferred due to a QDRO subject to taxes and penalties?

Retirement funds transferred due to a qualified domestic relation order (QDRO) are not subject to penalties as long as the transfer is done according to IRS regulation. This generally means the transfer must occur within a short period, typically 30 days, through a legal rollover procedure. A judge may issue a QDRO on a portion of your retirement benefits if you are involved in a divorce. The recipient of the funds must set up his or her own retirement account for the transfer. If the account is not a qualified retirement account or is not the same type of account as yours, the recipient may have to pay taxes or penalties on the funds.
Money market accounts and CDs are both popular ways to gain interest while keeping your money safe. Both of these are often used in between investments such as purchasing stocks or options. Depending on your current situation, a money market account or a CD could be right for you. Here are a few things to consider about both forms of investment.



Certificates of Deposit (CDs)



A certificate of deposit is commonly available at any one of your local banks. With CDs, you are given specified terms and specified rates of interest when you deposit your money. For example, the bank will tell you how long they are going to keep your money and the exact amount of interest that you can expect to get back. CDs are insured by the FDIC up to $100,000. Therefore, as long as you keep your CD under $100,000, they are a risk-free form of investment. You can get a CD with a time period as short as a few weeks or as long as a few years. You have to match your needs to the term of the CD and buy one accordingly.



These types of investments are great for those that want to maintain their wealth. You are not going to get rich with one of these, but you aren't going to lose your money either. You will receive a better interest rate than you would from a savings account, so it will at least get you something back for your money.



With a CD, you cannot take out your money before the maturity date. If you do, you will usually pay some type of penalty for withdrawing early. Therefore, your money is tied up for a certain period of time. You cannot do anything with it and you give up the opportunity of making other investments along the way. Therefore, you should only use money that you know you are not going to need for a while.



Money Market Accounts



A money market account is kind of like combining a CD with a checking account. You get access to your money whenever you want it and you can still earn some decent interest along the way. With a money market account you can access the funds via a checkbook or even a debit card in some cases. With some money market accounts, you have a maximum number of withdrawals per month, so it is not exactly like a checking account.



When you put money into a money market account, the investment company that holds the money uses it to make very safe investments. They buy T-bills from the government, bonds, and CDs to provide a steady stream of interest. It is much like a very safe mutual fund. They take the profit that they make and disburse it to all of the money market account holders.



The great thing about a money market account is that you can still use your funds to invest whenever an opportunity comes along. If you like flexibility, a money market account is superior to a CD.







Are money market checking accounts FDIC-insured?







If money market checking accounts are originated at a bank, they are insured by the FDIC. This means that the FDIC will step in and pay for the money in your account up to $100,000 if the bank goes out of business. However, some people get this type of account confused with another option. Mutual fund companies offer a money market mutual fund that is very similar to a money market account with a bank. If you invest in a money market mutual fund, it is not going to be insured by the FDIC, and your money will be at risk.
Finding the appropriate business start up help can go a long way towards helping you avoid problems with this process. If you are thinking about starting a business, you might want to form a limited liability company (LLC). Here are a few reasons to form an LLC.

1. Taxes

One of the biggest advantages of forming an LLC is that the taxes are going to be simple to figure. All of the profits or losses from the business are going to pass through directly to the owner of the business. Therefore, there is no separate tax filing necessary with an LLC.

2. Protection

Another big benefit of starting an LLC is that you are going to be able to protect your assets. With an LLC, a creditor or someone that sues you cannot come after your personal assets. This is going to separate the assets of the business from your personal assets.

3. Few Restrictions

There are very few restrictions about who can start an LLC. By comparison, it may be much more difficult to start a corporation in your state.

4. Credibility

If you are trying to gain customers, they are most likely going to prefer doing business with an LLC over a sole proprietor. This business arrangement is going to lend you some credibility.

What forms are needed to start an LLC?

If you want to start an LLC, the paperwork that is involved will be minimal. In most cases, you will have to fill out only a single document in order to start your LLC. In most states, this document is referred to as the articles of organization. The document can be obtained from the state website or from a state filing office. You will fill in the blanks and sign it and then pay your fee. You should also internally create an operating agreement. This is a document that outlines the rules of your business and helps to avoid confusion.
With tax season underway, many people find themselves concerned about their tax bracket. The federal income tax table changes every year and it is important to understand how much of your income is taxable. Taxable income is very different from gross income. Gross income is the sum of all the money you earn in any given year. At the most basic level, taxable income is your gross income minus your standard deductions. The deductions will vary, depending on your filing status. You can file as single, married filing jointly, married filing separately, head of household or a qualified widower. You can also file personal exemptions for your dependents. The Internal Revenue Code is complicated. The best way to get detailed information about your specific tax situation is to consult with a tax professional.

The Tax Table

The federal income tax table reports marginal tax rates on taxable income. Federal taxes are not average tax rates. Every income level, even if it is within a one dollar difference, is taxed at a different average rate. The table below shows the marginal tax rates for 2010 income.

Marginal Tax Rate Filing as Single Filing as Married Filing Jointly or Qualified Widow(er) Filing as Married Filing Separately Filing as Head of Household 10% $0 to $8,375 $0 to $16,750 $0 to $8,375 $0 to $11,950 15% $8,376 to $34,000 $16,751 to $68,000 $8,376 to $34,000 $11,951 to $45,550 25% $34,001 to $82,400 $68,001 to $137,300 $34,001 to $68,650 $45,551 to $117,650 28% $82,401 to $171,850 $137,301 to $209,250 $68,651 to $104,625 $117,651 to $190,550 33% $171,851 to $373,650 $209,251 to $373,650 $104,626 to $186,825 $190,551 to $373,650 35% $373,651 and higher $373,651 and higher $186,826 and higher $373,651 and higher

A Few Examples

Suppose an individual files as single and makes $38,000 in taxable income. Their taxes will be calculated by using:

10 % x $8,375 + 15 percent * ($34,000 - $8,375) + 25 % x ($38,000 - $34,000) = $5,681.2

Since each tax bracket applies only for the level of income listed. This individual falls into the 25 percent tax bracket. The highest marginal tax rate is 25 percent. The average tax rate can be calculated by dividing the taxable income: $5,681.25 / $38,000 = 14.95 percent.

Average tax rates will be lower than marginal tax rates. Because of this, there is no need to try to hit a “target” income level that will have a tax benefit.

Consider another example, in this case we will review the tax rate of a married couple that files jointly with a combined taxable income of $76,000. The couple’s taxes owed are calculated by using:

10 % x $16,750 + 15 % x ($68,000 - $16,750) + 25 %x ($76,000 - $68,000) = $11,362.50.

It is important to remember that a higher tax bracket will only come into effect with the income that falls within that range. In other words, if there is only a $100. difference of the income, only that portion of the income will be taxed in the higher bracket.
A credit history is an important tool for many reasons. If you plan to apply for a loan for a home, car, school loans or start a business, your credit history is the tool that a lender will use to determine if you are a credit worthy borrower. Your credit report is a record of your payments. Timely payments will ensure that you have a good credit rating and delinquencies will give you a poor rating. Learning how to build your credit can be a challenge for many people. Until you build your credit, lenders will be reluctant to approve you for credit. Or, a lender may approve you for credit but they will charge you higher fees and rates to compensate for their risk.

Step 1: Get a Secured Credit Card

A secured credit card uses your cash as collateral. For example, they will lend $500 at the start and they require that the borrower deposit the money with the cardholder. Then they will provide you with a $500 line of credit and you can charge your card and pay it down over time.

The biggest benefit of a secured card is that they will report your payments to the three major credit bureaus. This can help to improve your overall history and provide you with good credit, but you will need to make sure that the payments are always made on time.

Step 2: Retail Credit Cards and Gas Cards

Even if you have no credit history, credit cards issued by major retailers and gas companies can be easy to obtain. They carry high interest rates and low credit lines, however, they can be a simple and easy way for you to build credit. Again, be sure to pay the bill on time each month.

Step 3: Responsible Credit Management in College

If you are a full-time college student, there are credit card companies that can help you. You must be conservative and learn how to manage your debt, especially when you are new to it. Many college students spend more than they can and end up with a lot of debt. Be responsible and limit your cards and payments to a comfortable monthly payment.

Step 4: Pay All Your Bills On Time

Paying your bills on time will help your credit report rating. If you are building credit from scratch, be sure to make your payments your first priority. Your payment history will impact your credit rating, whether it's a utility bill or college loan. If you miss a payment, it can blemish your credit report for years. A good way to avoid forgetting about payments is to paying your bills electronically. Many banks use the auto-payment option. The biggest drawback is that you can forget how much money you have in your account, so be sure to keep track of all your payments.
Hearing about the possibility of an IRS audit makes many people uncomfortable. The thought of having to justify deductions and tax returns to the IRS is something that no one wants to have to deal with. If you want to avoid being audited, here are some of the top triggers for an IRS audit to watch out for.

1. High Deductions

One of the biggest triggers to an IRS audit is unusually high deductions. This does not necessarily refer to a high dollar amount of deductions but a percentage of deductions compared to your income. For example, if you make $200,000, the IRS will probably not be surprised if you have $40,000 worth of deductions. However, if you only make $60,000, they will throw up a red flag if you deduct $40,000. While there is not a specific percentage of income that they will allow you to deduct, this is just a general rule to be aware of.

2. High Income

If you have a high income, you are also more likely to be audited than someone with a low income. This does not mean that just because you have a high income, you are going to be audited. However, with individuals that have high incomes, there is more opportunity for them to hide income and use questionable deductions. The IRS wants to make sure that they are getting their fair share of your high income.

3. Cash Income

Another common trigger for an IRS audit is if you have cash income. For example, if you are a waiter or you work at a casino, there is a good chance that you are going to be bringing in a substantial amount of your income in the form of cash. Because of this, the IRS knows that there is a greater likelihood that you are not reporting all of the income that you bring in. In order to avoid any problems, you want to make sure that you keep detailed records of every dollar that you receive in the form of cash. This way, you will be able to easily provide records to the IRS if you are audited and avoid paying extra taxes.

4. Self-Employment

If you are self-employed, the odds of getting audited increase exponentially. As a self-employed individual, there are multiple ways for you to hide your income and take extra deductions. Because of this, the IRS pays very close attention to individuals that file their taxes as a self-employed person. For example, if you claim a very large home office deduction, the IRS might want to check it out to make sure that it is legitimate. You will also want to make sure you keep receipts for any business expenses that you plan on deducting.

5. Income Discrepancies

If there are any discrepancies between the income statements that the IRS receives from your employers and from what you report on your taxes, this is a sure way to get audited. You need to report the accurate amounts of income that you bring in.

If you take the earned income credit, are you more likely to be audited?

The earned income credit is a tax credit offered by the United States government to help low-income families. If you take this credit, there is a higher likelihood that you will be audited by the IRS. The reason behind this is that there have been a number of fraudulent claims recently with this particular credit. Many people know that you can get more money with this credit if you say that you have a larger household than you actually do. This leads some people to claim children that are not theirs and increase the tax refund.

Will early withdrawal on a retirement account trigger an IRS audit?

In most cases, the fact that you take money out of a retirement account early will not necessarily trigger IRS audit proceedings. However, when you take money out of your retirement account early, this could make your annual income much higher than it was in the past. When you have high income, you are more likely to trigger an audit than if you had a lower income. The IRS looks for large discrepancies between your current annual income and your annual incomes of the past. If your income is much higher this year, the IRS will be more likely to take a look at your situation.
One of the most common questions to a human resource specialist is, "what benefit does my 401k provide?" A 401k is a legal savings option provided in the tax code. It is also one of the many ways your employer compensates you each year. 401k options have been created to help you plan for retirement effectively.

Tax Free Contributions

The biggest benefit to these retirement plans is that you may use tax free dollars to invest in them. You contribute directly to your 401k each paycheck, and the monies are not taxed until you withdraw. For example, if your gross income is $3000. and you invest 10%; your contribution will be $30. even if your take home is $2500. This tax savings can add up to provide you with a nice retirement account.

Employer Matching

Your employer may offer to match your contribution up to a certain level. This amounts to an additional thousands of dollars in compensation each year you will not claim if you are not making maximum contributions. Essentially, employer matches are free money and a perk of the company.

Retirement Payout

Once you reach the age of 59 1/2, you will be eligible to receive payments from your 401k to assist you in retiring or planning for retirement. With life expectancy increasing, you may have to provide for yourself for 30 or more years after you reach the age of 60. These savings can be instrumental in allowing you to retire and not work during those golden years.







Do you have to claim income from your 401k withdrawals on your tax return?







Any time you take 401k withdrawals from your retirement account, you will owe income taxes on the withdrawal. The only exception is with certain Roth 401k plans where taxes were already paid on the front end rather than deferred to the back end. On traditional 401k's, however, the income tax is applied on the back end, even if you have reached qualified age or are taking a mandatory withdrawal. If you take a withdrawal before minimum qualified age, you will face a 10 percent penalty in addition to the income tax charged on the amount withdrawn.







How much are your 401k withdrawals taxed?







The amount of tax you pay on 401k withdrawals depends on your income level at the time you take money from your account. Your federal income tax rate is set based on your total income for a given year, including your 401k withdrawals. You do not pay taxes at the time you withdraw the money. Instead, you report the income on your year-end statement and pay taxes at this point. As a result, it is wise to make estimated tax payments to the IRS anytime you withdraw money from your 401k. For allowable distributions, estimate taxes at your current tax rate. Add a 10 percent penalty payment for any early withdrawal.
If you are trying to decide on a type of education savings account for your children, but are confused about the different options, you are not alone. Many parents are confused as to what type of account they should choose. They are left trying to sort through a Coverdell ESA and a College 529 plan. While both plans have some benefits, each one is good for different people. Depending on your situation, you could benefit from either one. Here are some facts about each one to help you compare.

Coverdell

The biggest advantage of a Coverdell plan is flexibility. It is often called the Education IRA because you have more control over the process just like you do with an IRA. You can choose what you invest in and you have more investment options. You can reallocate the funds in the account as often as you like and oversee the entire process. There are a few details tied into the plan that are important:

Not just for college- With a Coverdell plan, you can use the funds on any qualified education expense. This means that you can use the funds for preschool, elementary, middle and high school if you wish. They do not have to be used on college funds. This allows you to fund your child's entire education with the plan.

Annual maximums- With a Coverdell plan you can contribute an annual maximum of $2000. The money goes into the account after-tax and is allowed to grow tax-free.

Contributor restrictions- Any adult can contribute to the plan as long as they meet the income requirements. If you are a single adult you cannot make more than $95,000 and if you are couple you cannot make more than $190,000, combined income.

Child takes over- With this type of account, the child can gain control of the account once they reach the age of college. If they do not use the money by the time they are 30, they can withdraw the money with penalties. If they do not wish to do this, they can pass the money onto another child to use.

529 Plan

The 529 plan can only be used for college, there is no provision to fund primary education costs. There are a few key features of this plan:

Higher contribution limits- The limits for contribution in a 529 plan are much higher than a Coverdell plan. Depending on which state you live, you can put anywhere from $100,000 to $350,000 into the plan.

No income restrictions- Unlike the Coverdell plan, anyone making any amount of money can put money into a 529 college savings plan. Therefore, if you make more than $190,000 as a couple, this will be your only option.

Parent controls account- Unlike the Coverdell, you can control the 529 account money when they reach the age of college. If you feel like your child should not be in control of such a large sum of money all at once, you can allocate the funds where they need to go and let your child focus on school.







How do you qualify for a Coverdell education savings account?







A Coverdell education savings account has rules associated with it that prevent certain people from contributing. If you make over a certain amount of money, you will not be able to make any contributions to an account for your children. As of 2010, if you are single, you can make a full contribution if you make less than $95,000. You can make a partial contribution if you earn up to $110,000. If you are married and you file your taxes jointly, you can make a full contribution if your income is no more than $190,000. You can then make a partial contribution if you earn up to $220,000.
The New Year is the perfect time to set your finances straight with a personal finance guide. Regardless of how you ended last year, you can use this fresh start to set yourself up for financial success in the year to come. In doing so, you must consider how you will plan for taxes, credit and debt and how you will save for the future. Once you have these three areas covered, planning the rest of your finances becomes much easier.

Tax Planning for 2011

Individually, it is important to know your tax bracket and any changes to tax law that may affect you. This year, the Bush-era tax cuts have been extended, so your tax bracket will remain the same if you are earning the same as in years past or a similar amount. Further, a new tax break will appear in your FICA tax. It has been reduced by just over 2 percent across the board. This means you will see a bigger paycheck each month even if you are earning the same. The increase will be substantial for many individuals. To plan effectively, look to the following ways to reduce your individual taxes even further:

Deposit money into a qualified retirement plan. If your employer does not offer one, consider setting up an IRA.

Withhold money for a Health Savings or Flexible Spending Account. Your employer may provide this option; if not, all taxpayers are still eligible to open one individually. This allows you to use pre-tax dollars for health-related expenses.

Manage Your Debt and Credit

Your credit follows you for years, but it does not follow you forever. You can make smart choices to improve your credit this year, and you may find some of your past negative reports have even passed their statute of limitations. This means that the creditors can no longer attempt to collect or that, in some cases, the information may be removed from your credit score. Take advantage of this fresh start to make a plan to pay down debts and monitor your credit in the new year. Set a "year end" credit goal and work to achieve it by making regular payments on each of your debts. Further, set a debt goal, maintaining no more than 30 percent of your annual income in annual debt.

Save for the Future

Saving for the future involves both short-term and long-term saving goals. First, start by saving an emergency fund. This should equal three months of your salary in case you are ever unable to work or lose your job. Only once you have put this emergency cash aside can you truly be free to plan long term. Speak with a financial advisor about the future you are envisioning. Do you need to save an education fund for your future children? Or are you past this point in your life and looking more toward retirement? A financial advisor will be able to direct you to an actual figure of how much you will need to save in order to make your financial goals a reality.

Dealing with Debt in 2011

If you are dealing with debt from your past as you head into the New Year, consider this a fresh start to clean your credit report. The goal is not only to improve your score on paper but also to reduce the amount of debt burden you carry day to day. This will leave you feeling far less financially stressed in the coming year. It will also help you better plan for the other financial burdens you may face.

Improve Your Score

Start by reviewing your credit history. Everyone is entitled to one free credit report each year from the service Annual Credit Report. The website https://www.annualcreditreport.com is your source to access this report. Look over your personal credit score and seek out any areas that may be holding you back. Have you missed payments in the past? Do you have too much debt? Do you have a short credit history? Once you know what is causing your low score, you will have a better plan for improving the score. Here are some factors to consider:

Your credit history (i.e., whether you have repaid debts in the past) is the number one factor in your credit score.

The length of your credit history is important. There is nothing you can do to improve this except continue to build your credit.

The amount of total debt you carry when compared to your income will matter. To achieve or maintain good credit, it is best to keep your debt under 30 percent of your income.

The balance on your open credit lines is an important factor. Aim to keep this balance below 10 percent.

Credit companies consider the types of loans you have carried in the past. It is best to mix this up between installment and revolving loans.

Credit report mistakes could be hurting your score. If you notice errors in the report, take steps to have them removed.

Consider Debt Reduction

For most Americans, the number one factor leading to bad credit is too much debt. While smart spending and saving habits will improve this area tremendously, sometimes you need a little more help. Consider debt consolidation if you cannot deal with the payments on your own. Through debt consolidation, a credit counseling or consolidation company will pay off your debts. In turn, you pay the consolidation company monthly installments. In many cases, the consolidation company will be able to negotiate your debt down to a smaller amount than you originally owed, saving you money in the long run. Further, your debts will appear as "paid" on your credit report, improving your score.

Risks of Debt Reduction

Enter into any debt reduction or credit counseling service with great care. First, while there are many good companies, there are several scams or overly costly options. Always do your research into the agency you select. Further, consider the total cost of the option instead of just the immediate relief. If you determine paying off the debts through an agency will ultimately be more expensive, through interest and delays, than paying off the loan yourself, do not use the agency. This can be a hard thing to determine. To do so, always look at details such as financing fees, early payoff fees with your existing lender, interest rates and penalties.

How to Budget and Save Money in 2011

After the lavish holiday season, you may be wondering how to budget and save money in the new year. Even if you overdid it on holiday spending, you can get on track by starting a budget in 2011. Consider this a new start regardless of whether you have practiced good saving habits in the past. Stick with the basics, and you will have your finances on track come this time next year.

Save for Emergencies





Before you consider any long-term saving goals, start by simply protecting yourself for the immediate future. You could become ill, suffer a job loss or otherwise be unable to earn your salary for an extended period. For this reason, many financial advisers recommend setting aside an emergency fund to cover three to six months' worth of expenses. You can do this slowly. Start by determining how much extra cash you have to put aside this month. A tax refund is a great tool to get your emergency fund started. Instead of spending your refund, put it directly into savings in case you may need it.

Find Extra Savings





What happens if you think, "I have no money to put aside each month?" If you're living paycheck to paycheck, consider the ways you can reduce your expenses this year to give yourself more breathing room. For example, this time of year there are a number of opportunities to save on basics like car insurance , health insurance or your rent. Consider switching your provider or moving if necessary. If you are on the opposite side of the aisle and actually need to purchase a car or house for the first time, budget first, then shop around for a deal that fits within your budget. The beginning of the year is historically a great time to buy a new car and capitalize on discounts.

Reduce Debt





Carrying debt is by far one of the most expensive choices you can make. Your credit card company will charge you compound interest any month you do not pay down your balance. Instead of making minimum payments, work to pay off your balance completely on any revolving lines. Ask about paying off your balance on an installment loan as well, and you may find savings by paying off the debt early.

Implement Tax Planning





By understanding tax incentives and using them to create a plan, you can enhance your income each year. Your state and federal government offer many incentives to help you save for health care costs, education expenses, retirement and more. Among the budgeting tools you could take advantage of is a health savings account. This can provide you with tax-free money to apply toward costly medical expenses. Saving for retirement with a qualified plan such as an IRA or 401k will increase your ability to save for the future by reducing your taxable income annually. You may also find education savings plans on the state level. Further, you should aim to reduce the taxes you owe annually by maximizing your allowable deductions. Meet with an accountant to learn which expenses you should be itemizing to save money come April 2012.

Tax Planning for 2011

The new year is the perfect opportunity to decide your small business and individual tax planning strategies for the year ahead. Even if you've never taken time to consider your tax strategy in the past, sitting down and starting anew this year will provide you distinct financial advantages next year. First, set a plan based on your needs and goals at this point in your life. Next, consider which new tax rules and regulations can make those goals more achievable.

Establish Your Financial Needs

At different points in your life, you will have different types of financial needs. For a young professional, saving for a home or a family is important. When you have a family, providing health care and education takes top priority. As you age, saving for retirement becomes more critical. Where are you right now in your life? For tax help, consider how these tax laws relate to your needs:

The IRS allows you to make a one-time withdrawal from a qualified retirement plan without paying a standard 10 percent penalty if you are using the money for a down payment on your first home or for secondary education expenses for yourself or a dependent. This means a retirement plan is a great tax-deferred backup plan for saving for your future.

Healthcare Savings Accounts (HSAs) are tax-free options to put money aside for health expenses. This can greatly reduce the total cost you incur in paying for healthcare for yourself and your family. All tax payers are eligible for HSAs in 2011.

College savings plans can provide you with tax-deferred options to set aside income to pay for secondary education. Each state typically has its own plans.

When saving for retirement becomes your primary concern, setting aside the highest possible amount of income to your qualified retirement plan is critical. Build an IRA contribution into your monthly or annual budget. You can choose between a traditional or Roth option based on whether you need the savings today or in the future.

Consider Tax Law Changes

Congress extended the Bush-era tax cuts through 2011. This means you will remain in the same tax bracket as you have been in for the past several years as long as your income has not changed. Also reducing the tax imposed on you, Congress approved a 2.5 percent reduction in FICA taxes this year. This reduction can amount to high levels of savings on each paycheck, increasing your realized salary each month.

Consider Stimulus Tax Options

Your tax preparation should always involve becoming aware of tax savings available to you. Take note of recent stimulus initiatives, such as these:
As 2010 nears its end, many Americans are beginning to think about year-end tax planning. This carried with it a great deal of uncertainty throughout November 2010, as Bush-era tax cuts were a hot issue in Congress. As of December 7, 2010, however, President Barack Obama announced a deal that would extend all Bush-era tax cuts. This deal assured that Americans, including wealthy Americans, would not see any unexpected rise in taxes in the year-end filing process. It also, however, announced pending changes in other areas of tax law, including estate tax and Social Security.

Extension of Tax Cuts

Bush-era tax cuts represent a decrease of approximately 3 percent for each individual filing. This tax break was enforced unilaterally, despite income. Initially, Democrats wanted to remove this break for individuals earning more than $200,000 ($250,000 for joint filers) as of January 1. However, with the breaks extended, all Americans will still receive the break benefit.

In addition to extending the cuts, the new tax program will extend unemployment benefits through 2011 for individuals currently facing an end to this government insurance program. The need for long-term unemployment insurance, according to President Obama, is the main reason Democrats were willing to compromise on other tax break issues. For example, the legislation will not extend the "Making Work Pay" benefit that was introduced in the stimulus bill. This means you cannot count on a $400 refund if your income is under $75,000. Instead, the legislation does include a 2 percent payroll tax holiday. This means individual tax payers will see about a 30 percent reduction in the total figure they must contribute to payroll tax on each paycheck.

Individual Tax Credits

You will be able to declare tax breaks and credits for energy efficiency improvements to your home or vehicle throughout 2010. These credits include improvements to make your home more energy efficient, credits for purchasing hybrid vehicles between 2006 and December 2010, credits for purchasing plug-in vehicles or hybrid vehicle conversion options. The amount of the credit varies based on your cost basis. The marriage tax refund will still be available. This means that if you are married filing jointly and this results in a higher tax bracket for one member of the couple--what is called the "marriage penalty"--you may be eligible for a refund. Further, the extension of cuts exempts estates valued at $5 million for singles and $10 million for couples from the standard 35 percent estate tax.

Planning Considerations

As you approach your year-end tax planning, it is critical to take a long look at how the legislation will affect individuals, retirement funds, estates and small businesses. Since tax cuts have been extended, you may find you are eligible for critical savings you were not expecting. However, the date when your qualifying events occurred will be critical in determining if you are eligible. For example, the date you purchased a hybrid, the date you were married, the date you hired a new employee, and other such factors will affect whether you can file for credits and tax cuts. For this reason, it is important to keep sales documents and certificates to be entered into your tax filing.

Year-End Tax Planning for Individuals

Year end tax planning can become complicated based on the number and types of income you have over the course of the year. Individuals earning no more than $200,000 (no more than $250,000 for married filing jointly) will see your Bush-era tax cuts extended through 2011. This means you are still eligible for a 3 percent reduction in your income tax, and you may also find key credits thanks to stimulus bill incentives. Applying these incentives at the right time can lead to a much lower tax liability in the future.

Energy Efficiency Tax Credit

You may be eligible for an energy tax credit up to 30 percent or $1,500, whichever is lower, for improvements to your home designed to increase its energy efficiency. The changes must fall into the energy efficient tax credit legislation introduced in the stimulus bill, but if so you will still be eligible for the credit in the coming tax season. You may also receive credits for purchasing a hybrid vehicle prior to December 30, for purchasing a plug-in vehicle or converting your current car to an electric vehicle. The credit you receive is based on your personal cost.

Retirement Plan Deductions

If you contribute to a tax deductible retirement plan, such as a 401k or IRA, you will still receive the same deductions in the coming year. Married individuals filing jointly can deduct up to $10,000 in contributions to an IRA if they are younger than 50 and up to $12,000 if they are between 50 and 60. The maximum deductible contribution to a 401k is $16,500 for 2010. If you earn more than $200,000 as a couple, your modified adjusted gross income will be phased out for catch-up contributions.

College Saving Plan Deductions

If you contribute to a 529 college savings plan for your children or a Coverdell account, you can deduct a portion of contributions. For a 529 plan, the maximum amount you can put into the account is between $100,000 and $350,000 depending on your state of residence. This drops to a much lower $2,000 if you elect to use the more flexible Coverdell account.

Estate Tax Reductions

Estate tax will be eliminated for individual estates valued under $5 million and joint estates valued under $10 million. This means the standard 35 percent estate tax will not apply to an inheritance smaller than this amount. This legislation has not yet gone into effect, so it will not change your inheritance if you received an estate in 2010. However, it will certainly affect the way you choose to save for your beneficiaries.

Payroll Tax Holiday

There is no payroll tax holiday for 2010. However, starting in 2011, there will be a 2 percent temporary payroll tax holiday. This may reduce the amount you contribute to taxes on each of your paychecks without compromising your Social Security benefits in the future. This holiday will go into effect unilaterally, so it will not depend on your income level. Regardless, if you earn no more than $200,000, or $250,000 married filing jointly, you should be well-under the limit for "wealthy" Americans whose tax breaks may be threatened if Bush-era cuts do end in the future.

Year End Tax Planning for Retirement Funds

Year end tax planning is a time to get your retirement accounts in line in order to maximize your deductions. Regardless of your income, retirement planning is essential and can result in a much higher income both this year and in the future. Consider these final tips to ensure you are not penalized for your savings behavior and to further assure you are getting the most benefit possible from your account.

Avoid Excess Contributions

It is essential to know your contribution limits annually. Your limits will vary depending on your income, the type of account you are using and the options your employer offers, if any. For the year 2010, maximum contributions to a traditional 401k or IRA were topped at $16,500, and maximum contributions to a Roth IRA were topped at $5,000. These limits go up if you are married filing jointly or over the age of 50. You may also be permitted a certain amount of catch-up contributions from a previous year. However, you cannot exceed these figures without penalty. If you have deposited too much money into your tax deductible or tax deferred account, you should receive a notice from your plan administrator. You have until December 30 to take the money out of the account. Do not rely wholly on your administrator; keep track personally and know your limits.

Assure Funds Are Fully Vested

If you want to get a deduction for funds placed into a deductible account this year, you actually have until April 15 of 2011 to place the funds into the account. This gives you several months of wiggle room after your 2010 income has been earned and vested into your account. You may find you have a little extra income to place into your fund, or you may find your tax liability can be reduced by depositing more. In either case, make sure the funds are fully vested by April to gain the benefits.

Finalize Rollovers

Rollovers to a different type of account can be very beneficial if they are done under the right conditions. For example, you can roll over funds from a traditional account to a Roth account to gain tax benefits in the future. Any rollover must be completed by the Roth IRA deadline of April 15, 2011 to count for the 2010 tax year. You may have increased tax liability when rolling over from a deductible account to a nondeductible account, but this liability applies only in the current year and can save you money in the future.

Meet Required Distribution Deadlines

Once you reach the maximum retirement age of 72-1/2, you must begin taking withdrawals from your retirement account. These withdrawals are called required minimum distributions. You must take the money out of your accounts by December 30, 2010 in order to meet the IRS's deadlines. If you fail to withdraw the money, it will be withdrawn for you at an additional penalty of 6 percent. Avoid this scenario by making a final review of your accounts to leave no account untouched. In some scenarios, if you have two accounts of the same form, you can take the money out of one and have it apply to both. Otherwise, you will need to take money out of each retirement account.

Year-End Tax Planning for Small Businesses

Year-end tax planning for small businesses provides them with opportunities to maximize profit and minimize tax liability in the future. This is particularly critical if your business opened its doors this year, meaning this is the inaugural tax filing and will set the standard for the future. You will have important decisions to make regarding which expenses to capitalize and which to deduct. You will also have to determine how to distribute earnings to shareholders, where applicable, to avoid double taxation in the future.

Capitalizing Assets

As a business owner, you can deduct or capitalize each of your capital assets. In some cases, you will not have a choice in which strategy you pursue; however, in many cases, the choice will be yours. Capitalizing assets is the process of declaring them as a part of the business's capital expenses. They are not deducted in the given year. Instead, the amount of depreciation in the future is deducted each year. For example, if you purchase a large piece of machinery for $50,000 and anticipate it will last you 10 years, it depreciates at a rate of $5,000 per year. You could choose to deduct the $50,000 expense this year, but by capitalizing the asset instead, you can spread out the deductions and potentially recognize a greater deduction overall.

Deducting Assets

If you do choose to deduct an asset, it counts as a dollar-for-dollar deduction against your business's income this year. You can deduct a number of one-time expenses, such as advertising costs, shipping costs and insurance costs. These expenses affect your profitability in this year, and they will not continue to serve you in future years. As a result, deduction is a better method than capitalization. In fact, you are not legally allowed to capitalize an expense that does not fit the narrow definition of a depreciating capital asset.

Special Deduction Consideration in the First Year

New business owners have a unique choice to make in their first year of operation. During this year, all rules about which expenses can be capitalized or deducted go out the window. Every single expense can be deducted. This includes the expense you went to in determining whether to go into business, the loan application process, meetings, and the purchases of start-up equipment for your office. In the future, the types of expenses you can deduct rather than capitalize will be determined for you. In the first year, though, you will set a pace for your tax filings in the future by making the decision on your own.

Distributing Earnings to Shareholders

If you have shareholders, you will have a whole new set of considerations to make in your year-end tax planning. For example, you can choose to accelerate your distribution of accumulated earnings and profits to 2010. Rather than allowing shareholders to consent to dividends, consider paying out cash distributions this year and allowing shareholders to loan the money back to you. This can allow you to avoid double taxation. You may also consider distributing real estate from a C or S corporation to accelerate capital gains. This is also a good time to consider converting to an LLC in a statutory conversion. Taking advantage of liquidation laws would allow you to avoid double taxation in the future.
Joint tenancy is an option most often used by business partners, or couples, in order to share assets. The full legal name is "joint tenancy with rights of survivorship," or JTWROS. It simply means that both parties share possession of the assets and, in the event one individual passes away, the other will continue to own the asset.

Which Assets can be Shared?

Joint tenancy is possible for any property, including personal property and financial property. For example, brokerage accounts and bank accounts can all be owned through joint tenancy. Retirement accounts are an exception because of their unique tax status; if you would like to add a second beneficiary to a retirement account, the process is separated from a standard joint tenancy.

Why elect Joint Tenancy?

When you have an effective joint tenancy in place, each individual in a partnership can access assets without any hinderance. This means either a husband or a wife, for example, could execute a trade. Joint tenancy also helps avoid the process of probate when an individual dies. Since another party already has legal control of accounts or property, there is no need to go about the process of restructuring ownership.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Joint Tenancy

Joint tenancy allows two individuals to share ownership of assets. For example, business partners or spouses could both own bank accounts, brokerage accounts and real property. There are many reasons to enter a joint tenancy, but all of these advantages come with a few risks.

Advantages

The primary advantage of a joint tenancy occurs when one individual dies. Ownership of the asset passes seamlessly to the other tenant, and no probate or legal process will be involved. While both parties are living, joint tenancy allows them equal access and control to assets. For example, if one owner is traveling and cannot access a bank account, the other owner can carry out essential functions.

Disadvantages

Joint tenancy is literally sharing ownership. Once it occurs, it is difficult to divide the assets should a separation occur in the future. You must trust your partner in order to share ownership as well. If your business partner carries out a transaction without your approval, you have no authority to change the event. Further, if you pass away, the surviving tenant has complete control over the assets. They can sell, bequeath or do what they decide is individually beneficial.

Does a will or trust have any control over joint tenancy?

Joint tenancy occurs outside of a will or trust. Once you establish joint tenancy over an asset, you do not have authority to change ownership of that asset in the future without the other tenant's approval. For example, if you own a brokerage account with joint tenancy, it will pass to the other tenant after your death, even if you give other instructions in your will. However, if you and the other tenant have a joint will and are both deceased, then the instructions in your will can take precedence. In this case, both tenants have given their permission.

What are the capital gains problems with joint tenancy?

Assets owned under joint tenancy are subject to capital gains if they appreciate in value. Capital gains tax is charged on income earned through investments, and though the rate is different from other income taxes, it is still party based and based on an individual's income level. When an asset is owned by more than one party in a joint tenancy, the incomes of those two parties may be different. The capital gain is divided up based on a percentage of ownership in the property, and each party pays his or her respective capital gains tax. This can be favorable or unfavorable based on your individual circumstances.
You can use a settlement option to cut credit card debt, but this is not always the best option you have. Consider all the downsides of consolidating prior to looking into your options. You may find the downsides are too great to go through the process. On the other hand, you may find the benefits are great enough to counter any concerns you have about the challenges posed by consolidation.

Con: Simpler Options May be Available

If you can change your financial decisions and pay off your debt on schedule, it is always the best option. For example, you may have gotten yourself into debt by overspending. By cutting back your spending and making lifestyle changes, you can successfully pay off your debts without the hassle and cost of settlement. This will save you money and save your credit in the long term. It will also help teach you the tools to prevent credit card problems in the future.

Con: Cheaper Options may be Available

Look into the real costs of settlement. You may hear that you can save thousands of dollars through settlement, but this is not always the case. Most individuals choosing to settle a debt will be using a new loan in order to do so. You can take a new loan from a settlement company and pay off all of your credit card balances. But you will still have to pay the new company, and this rate can be exponentially higher than your original credit card fees. Add to this the loan origination costs, and you may find yourself worse off than before the settlement.

Pro: It can Save a Credit Record

You may be in a situation where you have few options. For example, if you have a large debt and have recently lost your job, you may be facing default on your cards or, perhaps worse, default on another loan due to your credit card debt. In this case, it may be necessary to think short term. By settling the debt, you can buy yourself time with your new loan. You can ensure the new loan has low monthly payments or a grace period to help you get back on your feet. In this case, avoiding default becomes the primary concern, and a settlement can help you do just that.

Pro: It can Save Years of Stress

Some people who find themselves in credit card debt just want to be done with it. They may have made bad decisions, been suffering from a low income or otherwise unable to keep their finances in line. Rather than spending years in negotiations with the lenders trying to pay off the debts, they would prefer to settle it all and be done with the process. In this case, settlement can achieve the goal. If you have the money to settle out of pocket without using an agent, settlement will save you years of stress and lots of money over paying off the cards on time, in full, plus fees.

What will happen to unpaid credit card debt if I leave the country?

does not simply disappear because you cannot pay it. If you leave the country, the credit card company you owe will likely send your debt to collections. Collections officers will contact your known acquaintances, including your former place of work or your family, in order to get you to pay. Each state has a statute of limitations on credit card debt, but this limit is typically in excess of five years.
A credit card debt consolidation loan can help you escape the pressures of collections agencies, save your credit and save you a good deal of money. However, whether or not all of these goals are achieved depends on the loan itself. Some debt consolidation loans can end up doing more harm than good. Look for these features to assure your loan is beneficial and affordable.

Low Interest Rates

The number one thing to look for in any consolidation loan is a low interest rate. With a consolidation loan, you are paying off your existing debts and adding your balance to a new loan. If the interest rate on your new loan is higher than the rate on your old debt, you have received no real benefit. You should never consolidate to a higher interest loan. However, with a good consolidation loan, the new lender offers you a "wholesale" interest rate for consolidating so many loans at once. Since you are moving to a higher limit loan with the new lender, the lender will ideally offer you a lower interest rate. You will benefit, and the new lender still profits because your payments will be high due to the limits of your loan.

Low Financing Costs

Some consolidation companies get creative with their interest rates by reducing the stated rate. However, they apply the reduction in another place. For example, the lender may try to raise initiation fees, online payment fees, fees to pay the loan early and similar issues. Always read the fine print in a contract to look for any hidden consolidation fees.

Restructuring Options

When you first consolidate, your immediate needs will be to avoid collection, save credit problems and otherwise deal with the short-term consequences of credit card debt. However, once you recover from this initial set back, your needs will change. For example, you may have credit card debt because you were out of work for an extended period of time. In the future, you anticipate getting a new job. You would then be able to make much higher payments toward your debt balance. Look for a consolidation loan that has refinancing options in the future without huge penalties.

Credit Repair Services

If you go through the process of consolidating loans, you should receive more than a bill. Determine what the new lender is going to do to help you actually repair your credit and grow financially from the situation. The best credit card debt consolidation companies have existing relationship with your current lenders. The lenders can negotiate with your current lenders to avoid many fees that would typically come out of entering a debt servicing arrangement.

For example, when you close your credit cards at once, you may see your credit score drop. However, your lender may be able to negotiate with creditors to simply have any record of your credit card removed permanently from your credit report. This will erase any history of missed payments. Ask your potential consolidation lender if credit repair and negotiation is an option.

How much do credit card debt consolidation loans cost?

There are several hidden fees associated with credit card debt consolidation loans. The first is the origination fee. It is used to pay your loan agent. This fee is typically between 1 and 5 percent of the total amount you consolidate. There will also be an interest rate, which should be low enough to counter the cost of consolidating. If your loan costs plus interest will exceed the cost of paying your loans in full as they stand today, be very wary of taking the loan consolidation loan. You may find yourself in a bad financial situation after the transfer.

Are credit card debt consolidation services worth the expense?

Credit card debt consolidation services should be designed to save you money, but few really meet this goal. In many cases, the expense of consolidating and paying off your debts under a new loan will be equal to, or greater, than the cost of paying them off. The consolidation services are only worth the money if you are facing a drastic financial problem, such as foreclosure, bankruptcy or default on your loans. The service may also pay for itself if the company you work with has excellent credit repair options as well.

How can I tell if a credit card debt consolidation service is a scam?

Unfortunately, it can be hard to know for sure whether you are working with a legitimate credit card debt consolidation service. However, there are some basic methods to expose fraud early in the process. Start by researching the address, phone number and website URL of the company. All should be registered to the same organization, and all should be registered in a state or local database such as the Chamber of Commerce as well. If you have any doubts after this initial research, ask for a recommendation from your bank, financial advisor or attorney.
A structured settlement is an agreement for periodic payments from an insurance company. For example, you file a lawsuit against a grocery store where you have a slip and fall. The grocery store is held liable for your injuries, but it has an insurance policy to cover the claim. As a result, you will enter into an agreement with the insurance company to resolve the payments.

Benefits

The main benefit of a structured settlement is financial management. On your end, it is easier to plan your finances when a payment is spread out over a length of time rather than paid out all at once. It may also be beneficial for your tax liabilities.

Problems

If you are financially savvy, you may feel you can invest the money in your settlement and turn a profit rather than waiting to receive the money for years on end. In this case, it may be better to receive the lump sum payment, even if it is slightly lower than the structured settlement. The exact details will have to be arranged with the payer.

Advantages of a Structured Settlement

An insurance company may offer you a structured settlement if you win a claim. You will not receive an immediate check for the money you are owed. Instead, you will receive this money through periodic payments. Depending on the terms of your settlement, you will receive different amount of money. A structured settlement has many advantages over a lump sum payment.

You will usually receive more money by accepting a payment plan.

Financial planning, including tax planning, can be easier with the help of a structured settlement.

Add additional income to your salary each year, rather than receiving a bulk check.

You can slowly account for the additional income over time with a structured settlement, making better use of the funds.

Structured settlements may have certain tax advantages over other forms of income making them affordable.

If you are unsure how to invest your money, or are not good at budgeting, a structured settlement can offer significant protection.

Possible Disadvantages of Structured Settlements

You may think structured settlements are just a different way to receive the money a financial institution owes you. However, a structured settlement rarely pays dollar for dollar what a lump sum pays. Commissions, fees, and inflation can all affect the sum you actually receive in the end. Further, since the money is held by another institution until it is paid to you, you cannot use it for any major purchase or investment. Most financial advisers believe, even conservatively invested, the money in a structured settlement will be worth far more through early investment than it can be worth through periodic payments over time.

Can you garnish or lien structured settlement payments?

Structured settlement payments can be used as income to the recipient. In a situation where wage garnishment is possible, it is also possible to garnish structured settlements. For example, if you are a borrower who has defaulted on a home loan, the lender may sue to to receive the payments you owe. Even if you have lost your job or receive no other income, if the lender finds out you have a structured settlement in your name, they can ask a judge to garnish the wages you receive from the settlement.

Selling a Structured Settlement

If you are considering selling a structured settlement, be wary that some offers are too good to be true. Structured settlements are designed to provide you with the many benefits, if you hold on to the plan. In some cases, you may find yourself in the middle of a structured settlement and may need a lump sum.

Deciding to Sell a Settlement

Consider the benefits of selling your structured settlement, the first of which is a lump sum of cash. Ask yourself why you need the money and whether it is it an emergency. Ask yourself if you simply looking for an increase to your income. Ultimately, selling a settlement will always leave you with less cash than if you allowed the settlement to mature. You should only decide to sell if you are in a situation where the immediate benefits will significantly change your financial situation. For example, you may be facing default on a loan or foreclosure on your home. In this case, a sale may be wise.

Following Legal Regulations

Unfortunately, once you decide to sell, you will be caught up in a tricky world of legal regulations. About 60 percent of all US states forbid the selling of structured settlements. If you are allowed to sell, you must do so in the midst of federal regulations. Always ensure you follow all state and federal laws, because you can risk losing your entire benefit.

Entertaining Offers

You do not have to accept the first offer you see. Typically, once you decide to sell, you will find advertisements from companies that specialize in purchasing structured settlements. These companies can survive because they turn a large profit. Instead of going with the first offer, wait to entertain offers from different companies and individuals. You may find that different buyers offer significantly varied offer prices and it will be worth your while to wait for the best offer you can find.

Tax Consequences to You and the Buyer

Structured settlements are designed to help individuals, who are receiving money as the result of injury, to receive the maximum benefits. This means the federal and state government overseeing the payments will allow for certain tax benefits; namely, the sum may be taxed at a lower rate than the other parts of your income annually. Once you sell the settlement, however, you fail to receive these benefits in the future. The buyer of your settlement may also lose the benefits. In fact, your sales income on the settlement may be taxed at a very high rate, further compromising the benefits of the sale. Always speak to a lawyer about the tax consequences before moving forward with a sale. Also, consult a CPA or accountant for important tax consequences as well.

Things to Consider when Entering into a Structured Settlement

Your insurance company may attempt to arrange a structured settlement plan if you win a claim against the company. With this arrangement, the structured settlement will allow periodic payments to you rather than providing you with a lump sum. This may sound like a fair deal, but look out for these problems with structured settlements.

Periodic Purchases

If you would like to make a large purchase during the life of your settlement, you may not have the funds available to do so. For example, you may know your insurance company is currently paying out $200,000 to you in $20,000 annual payments. If you want to buy a house this year, the annual payments do not help as much as the lump sum would. Consider this scenario when setting up your arrangement.

Investment Potential

You may be able to invest the money you receive in a lump sum today, turning the money into a much greater value in the future. If the insurance company holds onto the money, there will be no investment potential. For this reason, it can be in your best interest to take a lump sum settlement even if the figure offered is lower than the total payout would be over time with a structured deal.

Excessive Commissions

Beware of commissions your insurance company, agent or attorney is charging during the process of setting up a structured settlement. It is not uncommon for the agent to charge high fees for paying out a settlement. Check the terms of the settlement contract before agreeing to any commission structure. Make sure that a commission is disclosed.

Overstated Value

Your insurance company may attempt to overstate the value of the payments it is making to you. In doing so, it may be eligible for specific rebates, legal protections or methods to otherwise reduce the actual money it will pay you as part of the settlement. Build your contract to ensure that any financial benefits given to the insurer, as a result of your contract, come directly to you rather than staying in the company's pocket.

Conflict of Interest

Make sure that your attorney has no ties with the insurance company you are filing a claim against. In some cases, attorneys will earn a commission by convincing their clients to accept a structured settlement. It is illegal for an attorney to do this without letting you know. However, it is very difficult to track down and catch the culprits so it happens all the time.

Life Expectancy

Do not accept a structured settlement if you feel you will not be around to see the payments. This is an unfortunate reality if you receive your settlement late in life. It is in your best interest to assure payments are made to you immediately, when you need it most, rather than at a point in your life when you cannot appropriately invest, save or spend the money. Consider your financial needs when you accept a structured plan.
Military retirement payments are provided for every retired military person with a qualified 20 years of service, regardless of rank, status or salary. This makes the military retirement program one of the most stable in today's economy, but it is not always one of the most profitable. When you enter the military, you are automatically enrolled in the program, and you will receive the same benefit as others who have entered the service on the same day. Only a few unique factors will allow you to earn more or less in retirement.

Salary while in the Military

In most pension systems, an individual earning a higher salary over the length of his or her career will earn more upon retirement. This is not necessarily true in the military. While some calculators account for high salaries, the most basic calculator uses only a formula based on your retirement pay to determine your retirement benefits. This means the year of your retirement can have a big impact on how much you earn in retirement. In more recent models, this program was replaced. The remainder of this article will host an exploration of the differences.

Date of Entry

For the most part, you will have no choice in the formula used to calculate your retirement benefits: the formula is based on your date of entry. If you entered the military prior to September of 1980, you will be forced to use the Final Pay retirement system. In this system, your benefits will be based on the pay you were receiving on the exact date of your retirement. If you entered the military after September 1980, you will be enrolled in the High-3 or High-36 plan. This plan allows you to average the salaries you received in the highest 36 months, or three years, of your service to calculate your retirement. As you can see, the smallest difference in your enrollment date can greatly impact your benefits.

REDUX Option

If you entered the service after August 1986, you will have a big decision to make in your 15th year of service. You will have to choose whether to use the High 36 option or the Career Status Bonus/REDUX option. You will receive an automatic $30,000 extra toward your retirement for choosing the REDUX option, which presents you with a 40 percent pension check. If you stick with the High 36 option, you receive a 50 percent pension check.

Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA)

All plans offer an adjustment based on the cost of living. This helps veterans deal with rising costs in basic needs. Over your retirement, if you are paid under the final pay or high 36 plan, you will receive an adjustment each year based on the Consumer Price Index, which measures inflation. If you are paid under the REDUX plan, you will receive the same adjustment minus 1 percent, which means your COLA will be lower. However, once you reach age 62, your pay will be adjusted to match that of the high 36 plan.

What Your Basic Pay Is Based On

When calculating your military retirement benefits, you will use the formula Multiplier times Basic Pay.

Your multiplier is based on your years of service. To determine your multiplier, simply divide your total retirement credits by 360.

Your basic pay is based on your date of entry plus some personal elections. If you entered the military prior to September 1980, your basic pay will always be the salary you earned at the date you retired. If you entered after that date, there are two options. The first is the High 3 (or high 36) option. It uses the average pay you received in your highest three years of salary. Finally, there is the REDUX option, which uses the same calculation but pays a lower percentage over time. This option comes with a $30,000 bonus. Once you have been in the service for 15 years, you will have the option of either taking the bonus and using the REDUX option or sticking with the High 3 option. The High 3 option has a higher percentage pay, 50 rather than 40, in the first year of retirement. However, the percentages even out down the line. In order to make your decision, you can ask your accountant to show you which option will likely net you more retirement income.

How does the Career Status Bonus (or CSB REDUX) work?

You may have the option of choosing the Career Status Bonus (CSB Redux) option to calculate your base pay for your military retirement benefits. With this option, your base pay is still calculated using the "High 36" formula. This formula uses the average of the highest three years of salary you received in the military to calculate your final pay. With the CSB redux bonus, this remains constant, but the percentage of the salary you receive upon retirement will be reduced from 50 to 40 percent in the first year. It will slowly climb until it is even with the basic High 36 plan, and you will receive a $30,000 bonus for choosing this option. However, you may still be better off without the bonus depending on your salary.

How is the cost of living adjustment (COLA) applied for military retirees?

A cost of living adjustment (COLA) is applied annually to your military retirement pay. This adjustment is based on the consumer price index. Individuals on the Final Pay and High 36 plan will receive an adjustment exactly equal to the CPI increase annually. Individuals on the CSB Redux option will receive an adjustment of the CPI minus 1 percent. Once these individuals reach age 62, however, they receive the same adjustment as the other plan members. Consider these COLA differences when choosing your retirement options with the military.

Concurrent Retirement and Disability Pay (CRDP)

Prior to 2004, an individual receiving disability pay was not eligible for any CRDP (concurrent retirement and disability pay). The individual's annual retirement would be reduced by his or her annual disability pay. However, this has been reversed, and now an individual can receive both. If you have 20 or more years of military service and a VA-rated disability of 50 percent or higher, you will still be eligible for your full retirement benefit. This new system will be phased in over the 9 years after 2004, and individuals receiving pay in the interim may be subject to unique rules.

Calculating Military Retired Pay

Military retired pay is always calculated based on the formula Multiplier times Basic Pay. However, the formula for determining basic pay differs. If you are on the final pay system, meaning you entered the service prior to September 1980, the amount you were earning on the day of your retirement counts as final pay. If you entered the military after this date, you have a choice of the High 36 option or the High 36 plus CSB Redux. Both calculate your basic pay as the average of your highest 36 months of pay. With the Redux option, you also receive a $30,000 bonus if you choose to reduce the amount you receive upon retirement from 50 percent to 40 percent of this figure.

Which veterans are eligible for extra Social Security earnings?

Some veterans who served between 1940 and 2001 will be eligible for additional Social Security earnings. Depending on the length of time and frame of time of your service, you can benefit as follows:

If you served from 1978 to 2001, you are given a $100 credit for each $300 of active duty pay you received, up to a maximum $1,200 per year.

If you served from 1957 to 1977, you are given an automatic $300 earnings credit for each quarter in which you received basic pay, regardless of how much pay you were earning at the time.

If you served from 1940 to 1956, you did not pay any taxes toward Social Security. However, you will still be credited $160 per month for any service between September 16, 1940, and December 31, 1956, to be paid out to you through Social Security benefits.

How do you determine what your military pension will be?

Determine your military pension by using this formula.

First, determine your multiplier by dividing your total retirement credits by 360. Then multiply this number by 2.5 percent for every year served, up to 75 percent.

Multiply your multiplier by your final pay. Final pay is determined by one of two systems. If you entered service before September 8, 1980, your final pay is your actual final pay on the day you retired. If you entered after this date, your final pay is the average salary of the highest 36 months of pay you received while serving.

How do you qualify for combat-related special compensation (CRSC)?

You may be eligible for additional military compensation through the Combat-Related Special Compensation (CRSC) plan if you suffered an injury while in combat. This program provides tax-free monthly payments for the length of your retirement or veteran's benefits, longer in some cases. Congress provided this additional benefit as of December 2, 2002. For you to qualify, your injury must be a direct result of combat. Even if you receive disability or retirement benefits as a result of the injury, you may still receive this additional bonus.

When and how do you choose between the High 36 and CSB/REDUX Systems?

Once you have 15 years of service in the military, you will be asked to choose between the High 36 and the CSB/REDUX program. The CSB Redux program has the newest formula used to calculate retirement benefits. Like the High 36 option, it is calculated by averaging your salaries from your three highest paid years. The main difference is that under the Redux plan, you will receive a lower percentage of this salary upon retirement. You will also have a lower cost of living adjustment until the age of 62. Why choose the Redux plan? It comes with a $30,000 bonus. When it is time to choose, determine whether the bonus will make the Redux plan more beneficial to you.
When setting up a retirement plan for a small business, you have a number of options to choose from. Prior to recent legislative changes, small businesses could not compete with large corporations when offering retirement plans. Today, hyper-flexible IRA and 401(k) options allow small employers to offer great options to employees inexpensively. The problem is no longer whether to provide an option; it has become which option to use. Consider these factors in making your decision.

Paperwork

The first thing to consider is the paperwork involved with setting up a plan. Thankfully, the IRS has cut back on paperwork requirements with current plan options. Both SIMPLE 401(k) and SIMPLE IRA plans require only one form to set up. The same is true of SEP IRAs and other flexible IRA options. This is highly favorable over a traditional 401(k) that requires multiple sets of paperwork and notifications during the lifetime of the account.

Cost

How much do you want to spend on your plan? The cost of your retirement plan comes in two segments: the cost to maintain the plan and the cost to contribute on your employees’ behalves. Start with maintenance costs. Do you want to be the one to manage investments? Or would you rather give this responsibility to your employees? If you opt for the first, you will need a 401(k). In the second option, an IRA plan will work well. With the IRA plan, each employee sets up his or her own retirement account, and you can make direct contributions for the employee. The cost of contributions to your employees’ accounts will also vary based on the plan. For example, with an SEP IRA, you are solely responsible for entering savings into the plan. You must deposit the same amount for each of your employees, including yourself, which can make the plan expensive. With a SIMPLE IRA plan, however, your employees contribute their own funds. You can choose whether to match the funds or not, and you can give differing amounts to differing levels of employees.

Employee Demographics

Consider the types of employees that work for you. Are they your family members, part-time contractors or full-time staff members? Each retirement plan has specific eligibility rules for employees as well as employers. For example, the SEP IRA requires an employee earn at least $450 and work for three out of the past five years before eligibility. Other plans may give you the benefit of determining when an employee is eligible. For example, you may set eligibility to begin after one year or three months, and you may allow only full-time employees to be eligible for the plan. These options are up to you, but the responsibility to notify your employees of eligibility rules is also yours. Once you choose and establish your plan, you must inform all employees immediately of your elections, how and when they will qualify, and the options they have within your plan.

What is a leased employee?

A leased employee works for an agency outside of his or her place of work. On any given day, the employee reports to a company that has an agreement with the true employer. All paychecks, benefits and arrangements are made between the employee and the leasing company. If you are a small business owner, leased employees can save you large amounts of money. You can borrow the skills of an individual from a much larger company. That company provides benefits so you don't have to. Your employees can enjoy the rewards of working for a large employer while still coming to work in your small office.

Can I restrict the number of employees that have access to my small business 401k?

You can restrict access to your small business 401k, but you must do so under the regulations of the 401k plan you have elected. Some 401k plans must be extended to all full-time employees over the minimum qualified age. Others give an employer more flexibility to set standards, restricting the option to management alone or to employees who have been with the organization for a given length of time. When you are considering setting up a 401k, talk to your plan administrator about the cost of the plan. If you cannot afford to add all employees, assure you have chosen a plan that allows you to restrict benefits.
If you do business for a profit, you are eligible for a business owners policy. Business owners policies are available to any individual who is exposed to work hazards, including employment hazards, lawsuit or liability exposures. Depending on the size of your business and where you work, you will be eligible for a specific type of insurance plan. For example, if you are a sole proprietor working from home, you can add a business owners line to your home owners policy. Your business policy will be tax deductible and you will receive basic coverage.

Do You Need a Business Owner's Policy for Your Small Business?

You may not see the immediate need for a business owners policy, but any individual should consider the coverage. This is particularly true if you work from home or have a small personal business. Consider the following:

What would happen if you were sued for a copyright infringement for your website?

What if you were sued for defamation for a critical blog post?

All of these scenarios occur daily. Consider these reasons for obtaining a business owners policy:

Protection from lawsuit

Protection of any property used to supply your business or help you turn a profit

Protection in case you or one of your employees becomes injured or ill on the job

Tax deductions available to you for purchasing the policy or officially incorporating your business

Protection in the case your business is no longer viable and must declare bankruptcy

Ability to market your business as "licensed, insured"

If you do not have a business owners policy, you are personally responsible for the actions of your business. Your business policy can offer protection in the case your business encounters financial issues or other difficulties.

What is business owner's policy (BOP) insurance?

Business owners policy insurance protects you personally if your business is involved in a property or liability claim. For example, a photographer working from home may think they have no insurance needs. However, what would happen if this photographer displays a photo in a portfolio and a subject in that photo did not give permission? The subject could sue the photographer, and in the absence of a business owner policy, the photographer would be responsible for all costs for the lawsuit and any resulting settlement. A business owners policy offers a delineation between the owner and the business.
If your employer offers a group life insurance plan, consider taking advantage of the opportunity. You will receive many benefits, including the following.

#1 Lower Costs

In a group insurance plan, the cost to add one person is much lower than it is for an individual plan. This cost per person continues to go down the larger the plan. For example, the cost of the thirtieth person on a plan will be higher than the cost of the thirty-first. As a result, everyone protected through a large plan benefits from an overall lower cost.

#2 Ease of Contribution

You can easily contribute to a life insurance plan through your monthly or bimonthly paycheck. Just as your medical insurance costs are deducted, your life insurance costs can be directly deposited. Typically, life insurance on a group plan is less than $20 per month. If your survivors ever need the money, it will be well-worth this cost.

#3 Protect Your Dependents

If you have no dependents, the cost of life insurance may not be worth the reward. However, it is important to think about the responsibilities you assume for others in your life before making any life insurance decision. If you would leave survivors in a disadvantaged situation should you no longer be able to provide income, life insurance is a necessary protection.

What will happen to my group life insurance when I retire?

If you are on a group life insurance plan with your employer, you will not continue to receive benefits once you retire. Essentially, life insurance plans through your employer are left behind if they are not needed. You may have the option to continue your coverage through an individual plan. This can be very important when you retire, as the chances that you will need your life insurance policy begin to accelerate. You should compare the cost of this continuation with the cost of individual plans for retirees to determine which is least expensive and which will offer the greatest benefits at this time in your life.

What are the drawbacks of a group life insurance plan?

The main drawback of a group life insurance plan is its rigidity. When your employer or union offers a plan, the group decides on which options it will present you. As a participant, you will typically be choosing from no more than two plans rather than the long list of custom plans most insurance companies offer. If you are not in need of detailed coverage--for example, if you are very young or do not have dependents--a group life insurance plan does not need to be highly customizable. If you have very special needs, however, you may consider paying more for an individual plan.

How does a group life insurance policy differ from individual coverage?

When you participate in a group life insurance policy, you are only one of several or many individuals taking part in your employer's plan. The employer is the actual "insured," and you are a subdivision within this greater policy. As a result, the process the insurance company undergoes for determining the plan's costs and features is different from the process used for individual coverage. Your employer applies based on its revenues, number of employees and industry. Claim history will also be considered. Your individual claim history will not have an effect on the underwriting process. Instead, you simply get a piece of the pie once the employer has made an agreement with the insurance company.

Will my group life insurance policy remain in effect if I am laid off?

If you are laid off from your job, you may lose all insurance benefits including your group life insurance policy. Your employer has no responsibility to ensure that these benefits are continued on your behalf. However, you will be eligible for continuation of benefits through the COBRA system. It is your job to obtain the necessary forms to apply for and secure COBRA. You will have to pay 100 percent of your costs. During your employment, your employer likely split those costs with you. However, you may be qualified for up to a 60 percent reduction through federal programs. When you file your unemployment benefits, ask about this eligibility.

Can I get group life insurance if I have a disability?

It is easier to secure life insurance with a disability through a group plan. With a group plan, your employer is the one applying for coverage. You are eligible for benefits through your employer, and if you have added costs due to your disability, these will be spread throughout the group. As a result, a group life insurance plan is an excellent option for you. However, since the plan is tied to your job, you will lose the plan if you lose your job. In this case, you will have to find extensions through individual plans, which can be harder to secure with a disability.
A life insurance rider covers an additional risk that is not covered in your primary policy. Not every policy holder will need to purchase a rider. The rider coverage is needed by an individual with unique risks. For example, an individual with specific occupational hazards may need to buy a rider. There are riders for nearly every distinct need, so it is wise to explore your options.

Spouse Insurance Rider

This additional rider will insure your spouse. You can specify the coverage your spouse will receive, which may be equal to or lower than the coverage you receive as the primary policy holder. The greater the coverage, the more expensive the rider will become, increasing your premium.

Waiver of Premium Rider

This rider is a great option for an individual with a very high premium. Under this option, you will be excused from paying your premium for a specific period of time if you become injured, ill or otherwise unable to work. This is also a great option for an individual who is the sole earner in the family. By excusing yourself from life insurance payments, you can protect yourself financially in case of emergency without losing your coverage.

Accelerated Death Benefit Rider

If you become ill due to a major illness, you may find you suddenly need coverage at a much more rapid rate than you anticipated. For example, individuals diagnosed with cancer can require funding to pay for therapy. Insurance funds would be better applied to this necessity, rather than kept in the fund in the case of the individual's death. With an accelerated death benefit rider, you can receive funding immediately if you are given a poor health prognosis. This may limit the funds available to your survivors should you die, however it can greatly ease the financial burden of a terminal illness and therefore be worth the expense.

Long-Term Care Rider

As you age, you may find you are in need of long-term care. The harsh reality for many Americans today is that they actually need more money than they ever thought they would in retirement. People are living longer, but their health needs later in life have become increasingly more expensive. For this reason, you may consider purchasing a long term care rider. This rider will cover you if you need to enter a nursing home facility later in life, either temporarily or permanently. Again, it may limit the funding available to your survivors if your life policy pays out.

Guaranteed Insurability Rider

This rider is a great option for any individual who is concerned with their insurability. For example, you may be healthy today, but you may also know you have a high risk of cancer later in life. If this were to occur, your life insurer could drop your policy upon physical examination. With a guaranteed insurability rider, your policy will never again require a physical examination. By paying more money to your premium today, you can ensure you are insured in the future.

How does an accelerated death benefit rider work?

You can add an accelerated death benefit rider to your life insurance policy in order to receive additional funding if you are given a poor prognosis. If you have a terminal illness that will shorten your lifespan, you can receive up to 40 percent of your death benefit immediately. This sum is subtracted from the amount your survivors may receive upon your death. However, the money is most often used to cover the high cost of treating a terminal illness, which can make sacrificing the future income worthwhile. Further, this rider is often very inexpensive or even offered at no additional cost.

How does an accidental death benefit rider work?

An accidental death benefit rider added to your insurance policy will increase the amount your survivors receive if your death occurs suddenly due to accident. The insurance company will define accident very explicitly, so it is worth looking into this definition before purchasing the rider. If you have the rider at the time of your accidental death, your survivors may receive twice the original value of the policy. This rider is often called a "double indemnity" rider as a result. This rider is most beneficial for an individual who is the sole earner or who works in an occupation with significant injury hazards.

How does a family income benefit work?

Family income benefit riders payout your life insurance like a monthly paycheck. If you die, your survivors will receive a steady income for a period of time you specify in your rider. This option is best for an individual who is the sole or primary earner in a family with a number of dependents. By paying out the policy over months and years, you can save your family from complications that can come with a lump settlement sum. Adding this rider can be relatively inexpensive, but you must make difficult decisions regarding the length of time that your family will receive the benefits.

How does a waiver of premium rider work?

A waiver of premium rider excuses you from paying your life insurance premium if you are temporarily unable to work. This is designed to allow you to continue coverage even if you have a temporary illness or injury preventing you from earning a paycheck. During this period of time, you will not be required to pay your premium, but you will still be covered by life insurance. This option is best for an individual who has a relatively high life insurance premium and would be at a significant disadvantage without an income. If you can continue to pay your premium from a savings account for up to three months without concern, then this rider may not be necessary.
Each party involved in the sale and operation has specific duties, and this includes the franchisee. All of the franchisee's responsibilities have to do with the successful operation of the business, assuring it maintains national standards and is financially viable and profitable in the long run. The franchise is a national brand, and it relies on the quality of product or service provided at each individual franchise to maintain that brand.

#1 Financial Responsibilities

The foremost responsibility the franchisee bears is to financially support the business. This includes the initial set-up cost to purchase the franchise, lease a retail space where applicable and purchase marketing and support materials from the franchise at large. When applying, a franchisee will be asked to provide proof he or she can meet the financial role of owning a business.

#2 Dedication of Time and Resources

A franchisee is a business owner. He or she is expected to be present at the business, particularly in its infancy. An individual who wants to take a passive role in owning a business may not be the best person for this role. Rather, this type of individual is suited to be an investor. The franchisee will be busy, and he or she is expected to look for new opportunities to grow the business.

#3 Partnership with the National Brand

The national brand should be reflected in every aspect of the business. The franchisee will be given a business plan and will receive specific rules and regulations for operating. The franchisee should not only apply these standards in the business. He or she should also look for ways to improve upon them. The most successful franchisees will be awarded more than one franchise, and they will receive these opportunities by helping improve the national success of the franchise as a whole.

#4 Communication with the Franchise

Communicating needs, concerns and problems with the franchise is essential to fulfilling a role as a franchisee. The franchise may require regular profit and expense reporting. It may further implement new rules, such as changes in pricing of final or raw materials. The franchisee will have the role of testing these policies to determine if they are successful and reporting back to the franchise. An individual who does not want to be responsible to a supervisor in this manner may want to consider opening his or her own business rather than a franchise.

#5 Maintenance of Standards and Ethics

The final and last critical piece of the franchisee's responsibilities is to maintain the quality standards set on a national level. It is possible for the franchise to disenfranchise a franchisee who fails to maintain national standards. This includes preserving branding such as the logo and colors, and it may apply to even the small details such as presentation of the final product. An individual patron should be able to visit any franchise in a chain and have an immediate sense of similarity throughout the entire region or country, and it is up to each franchisee to provide this environment.

Does a franchisee have limited liability?

A franchisee's liability will rely on the corporate structure of the franchise and of the individual chain he or she owns. On the national level, most franchises are limited liability companies or corporations, immediately removing liability from any one individual. At each location, a franchisee must set up a business with its own licensing. For example, a franchise of John's Burgers may be called "The Los Angeles Series of John's Burgers." This individual business may also be incorporated into an LLC or a corporation, further limiting the franchisee's liability in the operation.

Does a franchisee have to pay himself?

As the owner of a franchise, a franchisee does not take a direct payment from the operation of the business itself. Instead, the franchisee is involved in a profit sharing arrangement with the franchise and his or her location. The franchisee takes home a portion of gross receipts from the franchise if it is profitable. The franchisee may also be eligible for profit sharing on the larger scale, collecting income when the franchise as a whole is profitable. However, each franchise has its own regulations for these models, and a franchisee should pay close attention to the profit model before purchasing a franchise.

How can I tell whether a restaurant is operated by the franchisor or franchisee?

The best way to tell whether a restaurant is operated by a franchisor or a franchisee is to look at its documents of incorporation. These may be made public depending on the state where the franchise exists. If you cannot find these documents, you may consider looking at the website for the location of the franchise you are considering. The website may have information about the individual franchisee. Finally, if you cannot find this information from one of these resources, the best way to find out who owns the restaurant is to ask. Most franchisees are proud business owners and will immediately let you know if they own and operate the franchise themselves.
A franchise agreement sets out the basic roles and responsibilities shared by a franchisor and franchisee. The document is signed by both parties prior to the sale of the franchise, and it is referred to should there ever be a conflict between the two parties in the future. It is different from the Franchise Disclosure Document (FDD), which is simply a legal document summarizing the investment a franchisee is making. The franchise agreement is like a rental agreement. It delineates who owns what, who has what rights and who has what responsibilities.

Establishment of Trademarks

The first section of most franchise agreements will establish the trademarks owned by the franchise at large. These trademarks and corporate business practices are proprietary, and they may not be used for personal gain without the consent of and compensation to the franchise as a whole. The franchisee is given the right to use the trademarked materials, but the franchisee agrees to pay a fee for their use. Further, the franchisee agrees not to alter or misuse the trademarks in any way not approved by the franchise.

Establishment of Purpose

A second critical element of a franchise agreement is a statement of purpose. This simply means the franchisee and franchisor have a common goal in mind. For example, if the goal of the franchise agreement is to share a mutual profit from the sale of food or clothing, this is stated in the agreement. If the goal is, on the other hand, to provide care for seniors, this goal will be stated in the franchise agreement. The statement of purpose generally answers the question "Why are we signing this document?"

Payment Agreements

If the franchisee has any financial obligation to the franchise, and he or she nearly always will, the obligation is stated clearly in the franchise agreement. This may include an initial cost to purchase the franchise and any ongoing costs such as profit sharing. If the franchisee will be obligated to purchase marketing materials, corporate documents, furniture, equipment or other outfitting supplies from the franchise in the future, this must be clearly delineated in the franchise agreement. Many agreements may say, "prices subject to change" or "additional products made available upon request and payment." This tells the franchisee there may be certain costs in the future that are not specifically outlined in the original agreement.

Restrictions on Business Activities

If the franchisee is prohibited from engaging in other business opportunities while he or she owns the franchise, it is important to make this clear in the initial franchise agreement. Some franchises will prohibit individual franchisees from owning a franchise in another industry or competitor's business. For example, it is possible for John's Burgers to prevent an owner from buying a franchise of Paul's Hotdogs. Ultimately, the franchisee must agree to these demands if he or she wants to purchase the business. The franchisor will also be limited, however, from causing the franchisee undue harm. For example, the franchisor may be prohibited from selling another franchise within a certain radius of the existing franchise.

Is my franchise agreement terminated when I file bankruptcy?

When a franchisee declares bankruptcy, a franchise agreement may be assumed and assigned along with other debts during the legal proceeding. This would allow the court to decide if the franchisee has any further legal or financial obligation to the franchisor and what that obligation is. If the franchisor would like to prevent the franchise agreement from entering the general bankruptcy filing, it can attempt to void the contract prior to the time bankruptcy is declared. In this case, it would have to show that the contract was broken, and it could move forward with its own actions accordingly.

When is an agency agreement a franchise agreement?

A franchise agreement provides a franchisee the right to operate under the name of the franchisor. The franchisee obtains all legal copyrights of the business, its marketing materials and its business model. An agent, by contrast, is simply an individual authorized to sell another company's product. The agent may sell the product under the name of the original manufacturer or company, but in the end, the agency is operating according to its own business model. A company may place restrictions on when and how its name can be used by an agency, but it does not control an agency to the same level it controls a franchise.
You must report and pay a tax on gambling winnings. This tax applies to all forms of income earned from gambling, including lottery winnings, raffle winnings, proceeds from bets on races or sporting events, and winnings earned at casinos. You must report earnings of any monetary value. This means that you must report cash prizes and any non-cash prize, such as a car or vacation. Thankfully, you can deduct gambling losses as well, which often helps to even out the taxation.

How to Report Gambling Winnings

You will receive a Form W-2G from an institution that has issued your gambling prizes. This is issued whenever the winnings are subject to federal withholding. If the institution does not issue this statement, you are not absolved from reporting your winnings. You must report them on your Form 1040. Even non-taxable gambling winnings must be reported to prevent criminal activity. If you are not certain whether you must pay withholding, see Publication 505. This IRS publication refers to "Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax."

How to Pay Gambling Winnings

The United States income tax system operates on a pay-as-you-go basis. Unlike other taxes, such as capital gains tax, the income tax is paid immediately when you earn money. With gambling winnings, you may elect to have taxes immediately withheld. If this is not an option, you must pay estimated taxes on a quarterly basis. You do not have to fill out forms to report income in order to turn in estimated taxes. You will simply fill out a quarterly 1040 and send a check in the amount you think you will owe. At the end of the year, you will file all forms pertaining to your actual earned income. At this point, the IRS will either request more funds from you or issue a return. Remember: most state income tax is also pay-as-you-go. You may be required to send in two checks each quarter.

How to Deduct Gambling Losses

You can deduct your gambling losses if you are a taxpayer who itemizes deductions. Claim all losses as a miscellaneous deduction on your Form 1040, Schedule A. This deduction is subject to the 2 percent limit, and you may not deduct more than you have reported as winnings in a given year. For example, if you go to a casino and win $200 and then lose $100, your net earnings for the day will be $100. You will pay taxes on only this $100 by reporting the $200 gain on your 1040 and the $100 loss on your Schedule A. However, if you go to a casino and win $200 and then lose $300, your net for the day will be negative $100. You will report the $200 on your 1040 and then deduct only $200 on your Schedule A. For questions on how to deduct gambling losses, refer to form 529 on "Miscellaneous Deductions." Remember to keep a detailed record of your wins and losses in order to assure that you can deduct properly and pay taxes on only the sum you take home in winnings.

What is the tax rate on gambling winnings?

The majority of gambling winnings are taxed at a flat 25 percent rate. If you win more than $5,000, your income tax rate may be used to assess taxes against your gambling winnings. You must report all winnings on a 1040 when you receive a Form W-2G from the institution issuing the payment. Certain winnings, such as those from bingo, keno and slot machines, may not be subject to taxation. However, you must still report all the income you have won, including that not subject to withholding, in order to assure that you are reporting correctly and not avoiding payment.
The decision to own or rent a condo comes down to two matters: financial feasibility and personal desires. You must prioritize these concerns in order to determine whether renting or buying is a better option.

Financial Considerations

Affordability is the first priority. If you cannot afford to buy a condo, then you must decide to rent the condo. Stretching your budget just to own is very risky, particularly in light of mortgage and housing market uncertainties.

Comparable investments should be considered. If you were to rent and invest an amount equal to a housing down payment, how much growth could you reasonably anticipate? Also consider investing the sum you would spend on homeowner's insurance, taxes and homeowner's association fees. You may actually find, despite many feelings to the contrary, that renting is a more profitable investment option. When home prices are not appreciating, taking money out of real estate and placing it in other markets is a wise choice.

Rentability of the property should be considered. When you own a home, you lose the flexibility to leave if necessary. This can be problematic if you must leave at a time when selling is a bad option. As long as you believe you could rent the property to cover at least the majority of your mortgage, you may decide buying is a wise financial decision. If you are in a market without renters, this can be highly risky.

Personal Considerations

Consider how long you can reasonably anticipate staying in the property. Barring any unforeseen circumstances, could you stay for five years? How about ten? Look at your long-term personal goals and see if home ownership fits in at this time.

What personal benefits will you gain from owning a property? Are you someone who takes pride in ownership and would like to make property improvements? Or are you someone who generally allows properties to deteriorate? If you are the latter, home ownership may both a bad personal and a bad financial decision. Taking good care of and improving your home is one way to increase its value, and this can add to the financial feasibility of home ownership. If, however, you know you lack the time or interest to properly care for what will amount to a large responsibility, buying can be financially detrimental.

How stable is your employment? If you work in a very unstable job or industry, renting gives you flexibility to modify your living expenses in the case of an emergency. Ownership does not come with this option, and you may be caught in a bad place if your employment changes.

Do you have assets to fall back on? Just because a bank approves you for a mortgage does not mean it does not pose a risk to you. You may find yourself in a situation where your mortgage becomes too costly to maintain. If you had to sell the home at a loss, would you still have a large enough financial backing to continue living your life, or would you face bankruptcy?

What's the difference between a townhouse and a condo?

A townhouse and condo have many similarities because they are both situated in multi-family residential buildings. The key difference, though, is the way they are situated within those buildings. A townhouse is attached to the house next to it by one or more shared walls. A townhouse owner owns the outside of his or her house, including any yard and external areas. However, there are no units above or below the house itself. A condo, on the contrary, may have units surrounding it on all sides. Condos are essentially apartments offered for sale rather than for rent; the owners do not own any property outside of their immediate units.
A deed in lieu of foreclosure option allows a borrower to turn over the deed to his or her home in exchange for release from the mortgage debt associated with the property. In shape and form, it is the same as a foreclosure. However, the main advantage is that the borrower does not have to go through foreclosure and suffer financial consequences from that process.

#1 Consider All Alternatives

A lender will in most cases prefer to foreclose on a property. In a foreclosure, the lender can charge the borrower all costs associated with taking over the property and, furthermore, go after the borrower for any outstanding unpaid debt. Since lenders may prefer this option, the borrower will have to sway the lender away from foreclosure proceedings. The first step to doing this is to outline the likely scenario that would result from a foreclosure. For example, consider if you could pay the lender outstanding debts or you would have to declare bankruptcy and be unable to pay any additional debts.

#2 Present Alternatives to Lender

If you discover that the alternative options are unfavorable to the lender, present this information. For example, tell the lender that you will have no choice but to declare bankruptcy if foreclosure occurs. Provide estimates of foreclosure costs to the lender in your area. If applicable, show the lender the challenges of selling a foreclosed property.

#3 Verify Statements Made in Your Presentation

Any statement you make to your lender will have to be verified. For example, if you have told your lender that you will declare bankruptcy in the case of a foreclosure, verify this statement. Do so by showing you cannot fiscally afford to repay the remaining balance on the loan once the property enters foreclosure. Provide a statement from a bankruptcy attorney showing that you would not be required to repay the debts, where applicable.

#4 Propose a Solution

Once you have shown the lender how costly it would be to go through foreclosure with you, present a viable alternative. Show how the cost of a deed in lieu would be less expensive. If you are eligible for the Home Affordable Mortgage Program's foreclosure alternative programs, supply your lender with information about these programs. Your job is to convince the lender they will benefit through deed in lieu. If you can do this, most lenders will agree to work with you to avoid foreclosure.

#5 Follow Legal Guidelines to Finalize the Transaction

A deed in lieu program works only if both parties agree to the transaction in good faith. Your mortgage must be secured against your home, and the lender must be willing to accept this collateral voluntarily to cancel your remaining debt. As a result, it is essential that you follow legal guidelines to show that your lender has voluntarily agreed to this option. Otherwise, the lender could sue you in the future for any remaining balance on your loan once the home has been sold. You may be obligated to pay this amount if any portion of your deed in lieu of foreclosure process is not lawfully completed.

How long does a deed in lieu of foreclosure stay on your credit report?

While completing a deed in lieu of foreclosure can save you from some legal hassle and financial penalties associated with an actual foreclosure, your credit report will show the same negative effect as if you actually went through a foreclosure proceeding. To have the best chance of saving your credit, negotiate how the process will be reported with your mortgage lender. Ask the lender to report the incident as a loan resolved in an unsatisfactory manner, not as a foreclosure. If you do have the foreclosure on your record, it will go away within 5 to 10 years depending on your state. Research your state's lending laws to find out the precise timeframe.
Condo foreclosure follows the same general process as any mortgage foreclosure. That process can take many years to complete, and it can result in substantial financial loss to both the borrower and the lender.

Step 1: Missed Payments

Your mortgage lender must notify you of their intent to foreclose on your property. You cannot speed up this process, and you cannot instigate a foreclosure on your end. As a result, it is first necessary to miss payments for at least 90 days. During this time frame, you will watch your credit score drop. You may receive attempts to collect from your lender. If you intend to allow the condo to go into foreclosure, you cannot pay when the lender asks.

Step 2: Foreclosure Notice

Once you have failed to respond to lender requests for payment, you will receive notice of the lender's intent to foreclose. Depending on the state where you own your condo, you will have a limited time frame in order to respond to this request. If you do not intend to pay, this is the point where you should hire a lawyer to help you finalize the foreclosure.

Step 3: Foreclosure Proceedings

The lender will begin foreclosure proceedings by assuring the terms of foreclosure according to your mortgage contract have been met. The lender will have to give you appropriate opportunities to respond based on your contract. The lender can only begin foreclosure if the condo has been used to secure the loan; with the vast majority of condo mortgages, this is the case. Finally, the lender will likely contact the homeowner's association in the building where your condo is located to notify the association that a foreclosure will be taking place. This occurs so the HOA is informed of the plans to change ownership of the unit from you to the bank.

Step 4: Auction or Sale

The lender will attempt to recover the money lost by your mortgage default by selling the condo. This can occur at auction or in a private listing. Foreclosure properties are offered for a very low price because the bank wishes to unload the property quickly. Otherwise, the bank will continue to pay high fees to maintain ownership of the unit. Condos in particular may sell for very low prices because there is a good chance there are other units for sale, possibly even bank-owned units, in the same building. For this reason, condo markets are usually some of the hardest hit if a regional foreclosure crisis does occur.

Step 4: Lawsuit to Recover Lost Funds

Once the condo has sold, you are not off the hook. The lender will attempt to collect any loan balance from you. This attempt usually occurs in a lawsuit. If you cannot repay this money, you must declare bankruptcy. If you can repay this money, you will be legally obligated to do so. The only exception happens when the bank forgives the balance. In this case, however, the forgiven amount may be considered income, and you will owe income taxes to the IRS.

Can a condo be foreclosed on for having unpaid fees?

Whether your condo can be foreclosed on depends on the terms of your mortgage with your lender. Only your lender can foreclose; no other organization has lent you money in exchange for your home as collateral. If you have a home equity loan, it is possible for this lender to foreclose. For example, if you owe fees to your lender, and those unpaid fees are grounds for foreclosure based on your mortgage contract, you may suffer foreclosure if you fail to pay. By contrast, if you owe fees to the homeowner's association, the HOA must apply to place a lien on your property. Only then can they proceed with a foreclosure.
Condo ownership is generally thought of as a step to home ownership, and there are many reasons it can financially prepare you for the demands of later owning a home. Generally speaking, condos are less expensive than comparable single-family properties. By owning and maintaining a condo first, you can set yourself up for the next step of owning a single-family home.

#1 Lower Down Payment

First-time home buyers in particular have a challenge when it comes to putting down a down payment. They do not have a previous property sale to supply them with income to do this, and many are young or in the early stages of their careers. As a result, opting for a condo with a low required down payment can make the process more affordable. On the flip side, an older couple looking to downsize or retire will also benefit from a low down payment. The difference between the sales price of a larger home and the money required for down payment can be used as extra spending cash in retirement when many people need it most.

#2 Property Sales Value

The sales value of a condo can be driven upwards due to improvements to and the desirability of the general condo building. As a rule, condos in small buildings are less affected by bubbles and busts in the housing market than are condos in big buildings. However, even condos in large complexes can present great property sales value if there are not many other units for sale at the time you prepare to sell. In this case, you are offering a chance to buy into a building where few opportunities exist. You will be rewarded with a more competitive market and higher prices.

#3 Amenities and Benefits

While you do have to pay homeowners' association fees in order to receive many benefits of condo ownership, these fees represent only a fraction of the cost of your total benefits. For example, if you would like to have a rooftop pool in the middle of Chicago, you may have to pay several millions of dollars. As a member of an HOA in a condo that has this benefit, though, you can enjoy your rooftop pool for only a few hundred dollars a month. Financially, the amenities offered by many buildings are a great bargain to individual homeowners.

#4 Lower Utility and Maintenance Fees

The cost to maintain a small property is much lower than the cost to maintain a large property. Even in a relatively large condo, you are not paying for items such as your roof, windows or driveway. While these costs do come out of your HOA fees, you are again sharing the cost with a number of homeowners. Further, it is less expensive to heat, cool, furnish and clean a condo than a large home. This can represent savings that may later be used to purchase a house. Or in the case of individuals looking to downsize, these savings can be spent on living enhancements.

How can you get a condo construction loan?

If you are looking for a condo construction loan, you will need to find lenders and programs that extend construction loans for multi-family residential properties. These loans are often considered business loans instead of mortgages. State and federal government programs will often limit their construction loan programs to facilities with four or fewer units. As a result, you will need to approach private lenders alone to secure most condo construction loans. Due to the size of the debt needed to build a large property, you will likely need a very high income, a good business plan, an excellent credit score and a substantial amount of personal capital to place as collateral.
Before you buy a condo, consider the financial costs added to the sales price through maintenance and other issues. While condos often appear to be cheaper than townhouses or single-family properties, the hidden costs can actually make the price of owning a condo higher than the price of owning comparable single-family properties.

#1 Condo Association Fees

The first consideration is the association fee required by a condo or homeowner's association. In many areas of the country, these fees can be moderate, such as a few hundred dollars each month. If you are purchasing a condo in a highly desirable area, though, the condo association fees can be prohibitive. It is not uncommon to find fees that represent 50 percent of your total mortgage cost along coastal areas or in the hearts of cities. Since you do not own any space other than what is inside your condo, these fees can often be wasted on improvements that do not raise the value of your property.

#2 Private Mortgage Insurance

If you buy a condo with less than a 20 percent down payment, you will be required to pay private mortgage insurance (PMI). Some mortgage companies will make this requirement on even higher down payments. Surprisingly, it can be hard to secure private mortgage insurance for some condominium purchases. This occurs because the value of a condo is highly variable based on the value of the building and comparable sales within the building at the time of sale. Since these factors can be unpredictable, many insurance companies refuse to insure condo mortgages. Having a mortgage without PMI may not be an option; where it is possible, it is expensive.

#3 Homeowner's Insurance

A condo is defined as a property with more than two shared walls. In a condo, you may have residents above or below you. You do not own public spaces around your condo, and this leaves them open to other residents of your building or even those passing through. As a result, condos are viewed as less secure than comparable townhouses or houses. Your homeowner's insurance will increase based on the safety rating of your condo. Further, if there is a claim anywhere in your building, you may see your personal homeowner's insurance rates go up as a result. This does not occur as directly in a neighborhood as it does in a multi-family complex.

#4 Resale Value

At the time you sell your condo, the sales price will be heavily dependent on the desirability of the building as a whole. Even a very desirable building will suffer if too many units are for sale at the same time. In this case, supply will be greater than demand, and the sales price of your unit will decrease. This is particularly true if the various units in your building are extremely similar. In this case, it is very difficult to differentiate your listing in a competitive market. Further, even if you make improvements to your property, you must always be vigilant about out-pricing the building. There is a price ceiling on most condo sales.

Are condo assessments tax deductible?

The fee you pay for condo assessments, also known as condo association dues, is not tax deductible. However, if you rent the property out as an investment, the assessment becomes an investment expense that may be deducted. When you are looking for tax deductions in home ownership, remember that you can deduct the interest on your condo mortgage. You can also deduct fees paid for private mortgage insurance, homeowner's insurance and other expenses related to managing the property. Condo ownership can be costly due to the assessment fees charged by the building, and failure to pay these fees may even result in an eviction.
The US Department of Veterans Affairs offers an Improved Pension benefit to all members of the military requiring additional support for day-to-day activities after retiring from the armed forces through the Aid and Attendance Program. The program is designed to help veterans and surviving spouses of veterans receive financial assistance to pay for ongoing care after exiting the military.

Eligibility

All veterans who have been honorably discharged are eligible for Aid and Attendance benefits. The benefits will help to provide assistance once Basic and Housebound programs have been exhausted. These programs are aimed at the neediest veterans, such as those who suffered serious disability while in the military. The vast majority of veterans will not need these first and second tier benefits, but they may still need help eating, bathing, dressing, initiating medications or taking care of other basic functions. As a result, the third tier of benefits was introduced through the Aid and Attendance program to help a wider range of people. Those individuals in a nursing home or assisted living facility will qualify.

Benefit Amount

The benefit amount a veteran can receive will depend on the level of need the veteran has. Limits are set across the board, however. A veteran is eligible for up to $1,632 directly each month to assist in daily care. A surviving spouse who needs assistance is eligible for up to $1,055 per month. A couple may receive up to $1,949 per month. This money can pay for a nurse or assistant. It can also be used to compensate a family member who has to take time away from work in order to care for a veteran who can no longer care for him- or herself.

Claiming the Benefit

In addition to filling out a standard application for the benefit, you will need to supply documentation of the claims you make on your application. Those documents may include the following:

Discharge papers

Marriage certificate and death certificate for surviving spouses

Copy of Social Security award letter showing the monthly contribution you will receive from Social Security benefits

Net worth estimate including documentation of inheritance, brokerage accounts, and so on

Proof of all income, including income from investments

Proof of all bills you will be claiming as part of your declaration of need, including medical and insurance expenses

A physician's statement of your diagnosis

Bank information and a blank check to supply for direct deposit of your benefits

Employment history if you are younger than 65

List of all medical facilities visited within the past 12 months

Problems with Claiming Benefits

You may be denied benefits when you initially apply, but you have a right to continue to seek the benefits you need from the VA. If you do not qualify, ask the VA to supply documentation of the reason. The VA may require an independent physician's evaluation, for example, from a VA doctor in order to verify your condition. Take the steps to overcome this type of objection. If the amount of your benefit is not high enough to meet your financial needs, ask about supplying further documentation of your financial need in order to increase your benefit.

How do you qualify for the VA Aid and Attendance program?

You must qualify in two separate areas for the VA Aid and Attendance Program. First, you must qualify based on your service. Wartime veterans with over 90 days of active duty, with one of those days beginning or ending during a period of war, are eligible to apply. Periods of war are set and approved by Congress. You must also qualify medically. To do so, you must be a veteran or surviving spouse requiring assistance to carry out daily activities. This is verified through documentation and physician's evaluations. If you are in a nursing home or assisted living facility, you may qualify for the benefit.
A spousal IRA is set up and managed by an individual in the name of a spouse. This type of account was created to allow an individual with little or no income to receive IRA benefits through a spouse. This can increase the retirement savings of the couple through tax deductible contributions.

Benefits of a Spousal IRA

The main goal of a spousal IRA is to increase the tax deductible retirement contributions a person can make if that person is responsible for another party upon retirement. For example, a stay-at-home parent cannot save for his or her retirement without assistance. The working parent needs to save for two people rather than one, and he or she must increase retirement savings in order to do so.

Spousal IRA Eligibility

Any married person who is eligible to set up an IRA can set an IRA up for a spouse. However, there are limits to how much a married couple filing jointly can save each year through tax-deductible contributions. The couple must stay below this threshold annually, even with the second IRA, in order to continue to receive tax benefits on the account. The limit on the spousal account should be the same as that on the regular IRA account.

What are the spousal IRA contribution limits?

As of 2009, the spousal IRA contribution limit was set as the lesser of

$5,000 annually for those under 50, $6,000 for those over 50 OR the total taxable compensation for both you and your spouse during the calendar year, adjusted for

your spouse's IRA contributions and

any contributions to a Roth IRA on behalf of your spouse

This generally means the total IRA contribution two individuals filing jointly can make on a tax-free basis is $10,000, $11,000 if one person is over 50, or $12,000 if both people are over the age of 50.

What are the spousal IRA eligibility requirements?

To contribute to a spousal IRA, the following must be true:

You are legally married.

You and your spouse are filing a joint tax return.

You earned an income this year equal to or greater than the amount you contribute to your IRA accounts

The spouse receiving the IRA is under age 70 1/2 in the year the contribution is being made for a traditional IRA. Roth IRA contributions can be made at any age.

Limits for spousal IRA contributions apply and may affect the total amount the couple can contribute to their combined IRA accounts. Opening a spousal IRA is a favorable idea for any couple in which one party does not earn enough income to contribute independently to an IRA.
The Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employee (Simple) IRA tax deferred savings account provides employers with 100 or fewer employees an easy way to supply benefits to those employees. Each employee sets up a tax deferred IRA account with a plan administrator.

Employee Tax Rules

The employee can elect to contribute up to the annual maximum contribution limit to the account on a tax deferred basis. The employee will not pay taxes until the sums are withdrawn from the account. The annual maximum contribution varies by year. In 2009, the maximum was $11,500 for those under 50 and $14,000 for those over 50. If the employee withdraws funds from the account prior to the minimum qualified age, he or she will owe a 10 percent penalty in addition to taxes on the income.

Employer Tax Rules

The employer must notify the employees of all plan features and their eligibility to participate in the SIMPLE plan. Then, the employer must contribute funds up to its predetermined amount, decided upon by the company, within each tax year. The employer can deduct this amount from annual taxable income. The only strict rule is that the contributions must be made within the tax year in order to be deducted.

What are the eligibility requirements for opening a SIMPLE IRA plan?

The basic requirements for setting up a SIMPLE IRA plan are easy to follow:

You, as the employer, must have 100 or fewer employees who earned at least $5,000 last year. You can count all of your employees even if you do not intend to make all of them eligible for the plan immediately. You must not have any other plans for your employees to receive retirement benefits, including these:

Union plans

SEP IRA plans

Qualified plans like 401k's and 403b's

Annuity plans

Pension trusts

Federal or state pension plans

If your company meets these requirements, even if you are the sole employee, you may be eligible to set up a SIMPLE IRA for your company.

What is the SIMPLE IRA withdrawal penalty?

If you make any early withdrawal from a retirement account, including a SIMPLE IRA withdrawal, you may be subject to a penalty in addition to regular tax payments on the income. On a tax-deferred account, you will always have to pay income tax on the back end when you withdraw funds. This category includes most IRAs other than the Roth IRA. If the withdrawal is made before you reach the minimum qualified age of 59 1/2, you will additionally be subject to a 10 percent flat penalty on the entire withdrawal amount, regardless of the size of that withdrawal.
Individual retirement plans known as 403b plans are a type offered to employees of certain organizations including public schools and nonprofit organizations and to some ministers. Since these individuals do not often have the option of a 401k plan through their employers, they can set up tax-sheltered annuities, also known as 403b plans, to save for retirement. Like any retirement plan, the 403b plan offers unique benefits and challenges to a retiree.

Three Primary Benefits of a 403b Plan

Contributions to a 403b plan are tax deductible. This occurs because pre-tax dollars can be deposited into the account. The net effect is a reduction of annual taxable income equal to the amount contributed. The amount you can deduct is subject to annual maximum restrictions based on your income.

While your money is held in the 403b plan, you can grow the sum through targeted investments. You will not pay taxes on this growth until you withdraw the funds from the account. At that time, you will be taxed at your current income rate. Ideally, your income tax rate will be lower at this point since you have retired.

Certain individuals may be eligible for a tax credit based on deferred income placed in a 403b account.

Drawbacks of a 403b Account

You receive tax benefits on a 403b account only if you use the money for its intended purpose. As a result, withdrawing any money prior to the required minimum retirement age will result in a penalty. This penalty is equal to the taxes owed at an income tax rate equal to your current income tax bracket as well as a 10 percent penalty on the early withdrawal. Once you place money into a 403b, you have turned liquid cash into an illiquid asset.

You will face some restrictions on investments held in a 403b. For example, some high-risk investments may not be purchased with funds in a 403b.

If you contribute too much to a 403b account, you may face penalties from the IRS. The annual maximum will limit the amount of personal savings you can deposit into a tax-deferred account.

Once you reach the age of 70 1/2, you will be required to make deductions at a designated amount. If you fail to withdraw funds according to your required minimum distribution schedule, you will face excess contribution penalties.

There are restrictions on how you designate beneficiaries on a tax-deferred account. You will have to specifically designate a beneficiary prior to your death. Due to the tax status of the account, the beneficiary may also face distribution requirements from the IRS.

Ultimately, when you place your money in an account that qualifies for a specific tax status, you are removing your independence over the use of the funds. In order to receive the benefits the IRS is willing to provide, you must also follow the IRS's rules on the account. Only set up a 403b if you are willing to follow these rules because breaking the rules will result in penalties on your account and subsequent financial losses.

Are part-time employees eligible to contribute to a 403b plan?

Part-time employees are eligible to receive tax benefits for contributions to a 403b plan. However, smaller contribution limits will apply for a part-time employee. To determine your contribution limits, determine the ratio of time you worked compared to the amount you would have worked if you were full time. If you worked the equivalent of a full-time position at any point during the year, your contribution limit would be that of a full-time salary earner for that period. For all other periods, use the ratio of part to full time and use the IRS worksheet for maximum amount contribution (MAC) to determine your allotted amount.

What are the 403b contribution limits?

The annual 403b contribution limits are set annually by the IRS. There are two separate limits:one is set for a combination of employer and employee contributions, and one is set to limit the amount of elective deferrals an employee can make through a paycheck. The annual limit for 2009, for example, was the lesser of

$49,000 or

100% of the employee’s includable compensation

In addition, the maximum that could be contributed through deferrals was $16,500. This amount could be increased if the individual had served in a public school or hospital for more than 15 years. The only way to truly determine annual maximums is to fill out an IRS worksheet to ensure you are claiming all eligible expansions.

Who can contribute to a 403b plan?

A 403b plan is offered only to individuals in certain public service or nonprofit roles. Generally speaking, these retirement plans are used by public school teachers, hospital workers and social workers. They may also be extended to the employees of eligible nonprofit corporations. The 403b plans are very similar to 401k plans offered to employees of other companies. Like a 401k, a 403b plan offers employees the option to reduce annual income by an amount contributed to the retirement account and, in turn, to receive a tax reduction each year. Also like a 401k, a 403b account places restrictions on when the money can be withdrawn and for what purposes.
When you are deciding which 401k investment options will suit your needs, you will need to consider the long-term impact of your decisions. Particularly because 401k accounts are tax deferred, the tax implications of your investments should weigh heavily on your decision. Ultimately, the goal is to have as much money as possible in your 401k at the time you aim to retire. The short-term benefits are important only in terms of following the law and keeping your taxes low.

Company Stock and Stock Funds

You may elect to invest directly in company stock. If your 401k is administered by a public company, you likely receive stock as part of your benefits package. This can go directly into your 401k, and you will not be taxed on dividends or growth until you take the funds out of your account. If you wish to diversify but still hold company stock, consider a stock mutual fund. This can help you own equity in various companies at once without streamlining your holdings so much as to narrow your portfolio.

Bonds and Bond Funds

If you are more conservative with your investments, you may consider bonds or bond mutual funds. Here, you are purchasing with the intent of long-term growth, and yield is a side benefit of your investment. One of the major benefits of bond investment is tax-free growth, reducing the amount you will owe when you eventually withdraw from your retirement account. However risk-free these investments may be, the security comes with a cost, and you can end up limiting profits by investing in bonds alone.

Growth Mutual Funds

Growth mutual funds aim to purchase low dividend, under valued equity that will grow over time. These funds target securities that have been under traded in the past, leaving them to have a relatively low price tag when compared to their potential value. In the short run, since the securities have a low value, dividends may be low. However, since you do not earn income from your 401k, a dividend is not as important with these investments.

Income Mutual Funds

Why would you want dividends at all in a 401k? You can reinvest dividends within your account to grow your holdings even further. For this reason, income mutual funds may still be a good option within your 401k account. You cannot withdraw the dividends periodically without paying a penalty. However, you can simply reinvest the dividends, deferring tax payments while growing your portfolio for retirement. Remember: your original cost basis is transferred when you reinvest dividends to create capital gains. This can result in a high tax payment when you do eventually withdraw funds.

Money Market Funds

Money market funds tend to be low risk and stable, which makes them a great option for a mutual fund. Like bonds, money market funds may not make you rich quickly. However, in terms of slowly growing your retirement savings, they can assist in diversifying your portfolio to hold low-risk, constant growth options.

What is the safest 401k investment strategy?

If you are concerned only about safety with your 401k investment strategy, the best option will lie in government bonds. Government bonds are backed by the full faith and credit of the US Treasury. As a result, even if the government is having difficulty repaying the debt, it can simply print money in order to issue full repayment. You are guaranteed to receive back at least an amount equal to that you deposited on a government bond, and you will earn a yield in the meantime. The profit on this investment depends on whether the yield outpaces inflation. For added security, consider inflation-protected bonds.
Capital rationing is a strategy used by organizations attempting to limit the costs of their own investments. Typically, a company engaging in capital rationing has made unsuccessful investments of capital in the recent past and would like to raise the return on those investments prior to engaging in new business.

Why Ration Capital

The main goal of capital rationing is to protect a company from over-investing its assets. If this were to occur, the company might continue to see low return on investment and even face a compromised financial position. Further, this can cause a company's stock to drop.

How to Ration Capital

The main device for capital rationing is increasing the cost of capital. "Cost of capital" is a term used to describe the cost of debt and equity, and it can be raised or lowered based on the company's willingness to borrow money or issue stocks. A company can increase the cost of capital by borrowing less, thus making it more challenging to invest. The company would engage in new products only if the anticipated return is higher than the new cost of capital. For example, raising the cost of capital from 10 percent to 5 percent would demand the company see a 5 percent higher return on any future investment than on those in the past.

What are the benefits of capital rationing?

The main benefit of capital rationing is budgeting a company's corporate resources. When a company issues stock or borrows money, it can use these resources for new investments. However, if the company does not see a good return on investments, it is wasting these resources. By capital rationing, which is the process of increasing the cost of capital, the company can make sure it takes on fewer projects. Further, it can take on only projects for which the anticipated return on investment is high. This will prevent the company from over-extending its finances, which would cause a decrease in stock price and stability.
403b retirement plans are a popular way for individuals to save for retirement. If you are considering this plan among the many different retirement plans that are available to you, you should find out some basic information about it first. Here are a few things that you need to know about 403b retirement plans.

1. Who Can Contribute?

It is important for you to understand that not everyone will be able to contribute to this type of retirement plan. This is a type of retirement plan that is only available to employees of tax exempt companies. For example, doctors and nurses can contribute if they work for a hospital. Ministers and other church employees can also contribute to this type of plan. Teachers and librarians can also contribute to this type of account.

2. Why Contribute to a 403B?

Contributing to this type of account can provide you with a number of benefits when you are saving for retirement. One of the primary reasons to contribute to this type of account is because contributions can be made on a pretax basis. This means that you will be able to deduct a portion of your income from your paycheck before taxes are withdrawn. This has the ability to lower your taxable income for the year significantly. Another big advantage of this type of account is that you can allow your gains from investments to grow tax-free as well. You will not have to start paying taxes on the money from your account until you begin taking withdrawals during retirement. Even if you are already going to receive a pension plan, using a 403B can be a good way to supplement your income.

3. How Much to Contribute

When you open this type of retirement account, you can contribute money every year. You will be subject to annual contribution limits. As of 2010, you can contribute as much as $16,500 per year to your account. If you are over the age of 50, you can contribute a maximum of $22,000 per year.

4. Investment Options

When you set aside money for your 403B account, you will be able to use the money to invest in various securities. In most cases, you will have the same investment options as a 401(k) or another type of retirement account. You will be able to choose from a variety of stocks, mutual funds and bonds. Some accounts will even provide you more unique options to choose from. Many plans will also provide you with a selection of annuities to choose from as well.

5. Are There Fees Involved?

In order to benefit from this type of account, you will have to pay fees. The provider of the account will charge you something in order to keep the account open. Many times, this will come in the form of an annual fee, or an account maintenance fee.

403(b) Plan

The 403(b) plan is a type of retirement plan that is very similar to a 401(k) in that individuals can make pretax contributions to their accounts. This type of retirement account is only for certain people who qualify for it, for example, school teachers, ministers and employees of other tax exempt organizations. Once an individual puts money into this type of account, she can invest in different types of securities and the interest will grow tax-free. The account holder is allowed to invest in annuity contracts with insurance companies, or she can invest in a variety of mutual funds.
A real estate contract is a written agreement for the purchase, sale or exchange of real property between a buyer and a seller.



A real estate contract must contain the following in order for it to be legally enforceable:



• Buyer/seller identification--The legal name of each party must be on the contract. If the transaction involves an intermediary such as a real estate agent, her name and broker information must also be included on the contract for her to receive commission on the sale of the property.

• Property address--The property address must be included on the contract. Along with the address, the contract will usually have space to include a parcel number.

• Purchase price--The sales price of the property needs to be included on the contract.

• Signatures--All parties need to sign the contract.



The rest of the contract outlines terms and conditions that are subject to negotiation. Here are the major sections that make up a real estate contract.



Financing Section

The financing section details how the property will be paid for. If a mortgage is going to be obtained, the interest rate and terms of the loan are usually included in this section. A buyer will typically include a loan pre-approval from his lender to demonstrate his creditworthiness.



Deposit

Although not a requirement of a real estate contract, most will have the option to include an earnest money deposit in the form of a check. The deposit shows the seller that the buyer is committed to closing on the sale of the property. The deposit is held in an escrow account and released at the close of escrow.



Contingencies

A contingency is a condition that must be met for the exchange of the property. If a contingency is not met, the contract can be cancelled or terms of the contract can be re-negotiated. Most real estate contracts contain at least one contingency; however, they are not legally required. These are the most common contingencies found in a real estate contract:



• Loan Contingency--If a buyer is applying for financing through a lender, he will want to include a contingency that the contract can be canceled if his loan is not funded. Buyers can also cancel if the interest rate is not what they anticipated.

• Inspection Contingency--A buyer also wants to ensure that the house is in good condition and will not release a contingency until a property inspection is completed. Any as-yet-unknown defect that may affect the value of the property or a failure to make repairs on known defects is grounds for a cancellation.

• Appraisal Contingency--A lender will require a borrower to obtain an appraisal on the property being purchased. The lender wants to ensure that the value of the property is worth the loan amount. An appraiser is hired to determine the value of the property based on similar homes that have recently sold in the area. The appraisal will give the property a value. If the property doesn’t appraise for the amount of money the seller is requesting, the lender will not fund the loan.



Once a condition is satisfied, the seller will request that the contingency be removed. If the buyer does not remove the contingency within a specified time frame, the seller has the right to rescind or cancel the contract.



Closing Costs

There are several closing costs that are paid by the seller or the buyer or that are split evenly between the two parties. Some of these closing costs include inspection, title insurance, appraisal fee, homeowner’s insurance and property tax. The contract will list which party is responsible for each closing cost.



Date of Possession

At the close of escrow, the title to the property is transferred from the seller to the buyer. This happens after the money has been exchanged for the property and the transfer of ownership has been recorded with the county. The contract will specify the date that the sale is anticipated to close.

Restrictive Covenant

A restrictive covenant is an agreement in which the buyer of real estate agrees to complete a certain action. This could also mean that the person has to abstain from doing certain things. In most cases, a restrictive covenant is part of a real estate transaction in which someone is buying into a subdivision, condominium or some other type of group living arrangement. The homeowner may have to abide by rules such as maintaining his or her property or choosing the proper type of exterior for outbuildings. The restrictive covenant must be adhered to in order to avoid fines or further legal action.
A deed in lieu of foreclosure option allows a borrower to turn over the deed to his or her home in exchange for release from the mortgage debt associated with the property. In shape and form, it is the same as a foreclosure. However, the main advantage is that the borrower does not have to go through foreclosure and suffer financial consequences from that process.

#1 Consider All Alternatives

A lender will in most cases prefer to foreclose on a property. In a foreclosure, the lender can charge the borrower all costs associated with taking over the property and, furthermore, go after the borrower for any outstanding unpaid debt. Since lenders may prefer this option, the borrower will have to sway the lender away from foreclosure proceedings. The first step to doing this is to outline the likely scenario that would result from a foreclosure. For example, consider if you could pay the lender outstanding debts or you would have to declare bankruptcy and be unable to pay any additional debts.

#2 Present Alternatives to Lender

If you discover that the alternative options are unfavorable to the lender, present this information. For example, tell the lender that you will have no choice but to declare bankruptcy if foreclosure occurs. Provide estimates of foreclosure costs to the lender in your area. If applicable, show the lender the challenges of selling a foreclosed property.

#3 Verify Statements Made in Your Presentation

Any statement you make to your lender will have to be verified. For example, if you have told your lender that you will declare bankruptcy in the case of a foreclosure, verify this statement. Do so by showing you cannot fiscally afford to repay the remaining balance on the loan once the property enters foreclosure. Provide a statement from a bankruptcy attorney showing that you would not be required to repay the debts, where applicable.

#4 Propose a Solution

Once you have shown the lender how costly it would be to go through foreclosure with you, present a viable alternative. Show how the cost of a deed in lieu would be less expensive. If you are eligible for the Home Affordable Mortgage Program's foreclosure alternative programs, supply your lender with information about these programs. Your job is to convince the lender they will benefit through deed in lieu. If you can do this, most lenders will agree to work with you to avoid foreclosure.

#5 Follow Legal Guidelines to Finalize the Transaction

A deed in lieu program works only if both parties agree to the transaction in good faith. Your mortgage must be secured against your home, and the lender must be willing to accept this collateral voluntarily to cancel your remaining debt. As a result, it is essential that you follow legal guidelines to show that your lender has voluntarily agreed to this option. Otherwise, the lender could sue you in the future for any remaining balance on your loan once the home has been sold. You may be obligated to pay this amount if any portion of your deed in lieu of foreclosure process is not lawfully completed.

How long does a deed in lieu of foreclosure stay on your credit report?

While completing a deed in lieu of foreclosure can save you from some legal hassle and financial penalties associated with an actual foreclosure, your credit report will show the same negative effect as if you actually went through a foreclosure proceeding. To have the best chance of saving your credit, negotiate how the process will be reported with your mortgage lender. Ask the lender to report the incident as a loan resolved in an unsatisfactory manner, not as a foreclosure. If you do have the foreclosure on your record, it will go away within 5 to 10 years depending on your state. Research your state's lending laws to find out the precise timeframe.
A mortgage equity accelerator program is designed to help borrowers save money on interest and pay off their loans more quickly. While this type of program can be very beneficial, it can also cause problems for certain borrowers. Here are a few things to consider about the mortgage equity accelerator program and whether it is right for you.

Mortgage Equity Accelerator

With this type of account, the amount of interest that is charged is going to depend on how much money is in your account. You will have a bank account that is tied to the mortgage balance. Every time that you get paid, your money is going to go directly into this account. The amount of money that goes into the account is going to lower the mortgage balance while it is in there. The interest on the loan will then be calculated depending on the remaining mortgage balance. By using this type of account, you are hoping that you are going to be able to save money on interest because the mortgage balance will be lower when the interest is calculated.

With this type of mortgage, the interest typically has an adjustable rate. This means that it is tied to market interest rates and is going to fluctuate up and down.

Who Can Benefit

This type of mortgage can be very beneficial for the right type of borrower. For example, if you have a large income, it can be beneficial to use this type of mortgage. You are going to have your entire paycheck deposited into the account that is tied to the mortgage. Because of this, it is going to significantly lower the mortgage balance when the interest is calculated on the loan. If you do this over a long period of time, you are going to find that the interest that you pay is significantly less. Many people that fit into this category can successfully cut many years off of the time that it takes them to pay their mortgages. You could also cut thousands of dollars off of the entire balance of the loan with interest.

When to Avoid

Even though this loan can be very beneficial, it is definitely not for everyone. If you do not have a large income or you do not keep money in your bank account for very long, this may not be a good mortgage loan for you to get into. If you never have any money in your account, the balance of the mortgage is not going to be lowered. This means that the interest that you have to pay is going to be significantly higher than what other individuals with higher incomes will have to pay.

If you are the type of individual that does not want to take the risk of getting an adjustable-rate mortgage, this is also not a good option for you to pursue. This type of mortgage carries with it some risks if interest rates in the market increase.

Mortgage Accelerator

A mortgage accelerator loan is designed to provide home buyers with a way to pay off their mortgages early. With this type of mortgage, you will have an account that is tied to the mortgage. You can keep money in this savings account, and it will take money off of the principal balance of the loan. When the mortgage is calculated each month, the interest will be based on the principal balance minus the amount of money in your account. If you have a large amount of savings, you could potentially save a substantial amount of money on interest.
The government created a home affordable program as an alternative to provide assistance for homeowners’ affected by the collapse of the housing market. Many homeowners’ are experiencing a reduction in hours and loss of income. These types of losses are placing homeowners in jeopardy of losing their homes. The Home Affordable Modification Program may be able to lift the financial burden from financial duress. The Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) was specifically designed for homeowners’ who are unable to afford making their current monthly mortgage payments due to financial hardships.

Eligibility

In order to be eligible for this program, you must meet the following criteria:

Own a one- to four-unit property;

Have an unpaid balance;

Have a first lien mortgage originated on or before January 1, 2009;

Monthly mortgage payment is more than 31 percent of your gross income; and

Have a documented financial hardship to explain why mortgage payments are unaffordable.

If you feel that you meet all of the criteria, you can do a quick check online to confirm that you are eligible. The online application will tell you what to do next. Be sure to have your income and credit payments handy to complete all sections of the qualification process accurately.

Home Modification

Home modification is a process that is used by many mortgage lenders in order to assist individuals who are close to foreclosure. Generally, the mortgage company has a lot to lose when a mortgage loan goes into foreclosure, and it is in the company's best interest to prevent this from happening if at all possible.

This process allows the lender to agree to new terms with a borrower. In some cases, the lender will lower the amount of interest that is being charged, which will lower the monthly payment. In other cases, the lender will extend the repayment period also.
A balloon mortgage loan is a type of loan that allows you to put off paying for the principal of the loan until the end of the term. The principal of the loan is not addressed until the end of the loan term. Therefore, you will have to make a large payment in the amount of money that you originally borrowed at the end of your mortgage.

Considerations

This type of mortgage can be very attractive because it allows you to make smaller monthly mortgage payments throughout the life of your mortgage. The drawback to this type of mortgage is that you are not going to be addressing any principal on the loan. You will not accumulate any equity in your house and you will have to come up with a large amount of money at the end of the loan term. Many people do not take into consideration how they are going to pay for the balloon payment and they are unable to make the payment.

Can you turn a second balloon mortgage into a fixed-rate mortgage?

You could potentially turn a second balloon mortgage into a fixed-rate loan in certain cases. In order to do this, you need to refinance your existing balloon mortgage. This will require you to apply for a new loan and then use the funds from that loan to pay off the existing loan. At that point, you will be able to choose a fixed-rate loan for the new loan type that you will be paying. This will give you a fixed payment that will pay off the principal of the loan instead of leaving it until the end of the term.
A lease is an alternative method of acquiring the use of a vehicle. It is an ongoing financial arrangement whereby you (the lessee) sign a two-to four-year contract, drive the vehicle for the allotted time, return it to the lessor (the dealership) at the end of the lease, and either buy the car, enter into another lease for a new car, or walk away with no further obligation. Lease payments are generally lower than regular loan payments would be to finance the same vehicle. With loan financing, you retain ownership of the car after the final payment is made. When leasing, ownership of the vehicle remains with the lessor throughout and after the term of the lease, unless you choose to purchase it. Leasing, therefore, does not allow you to build ownership value, or equity, in the vehicle; it does, however, free you from the major expense of owning a newer car, which is depreciation.

Financers offer two types of leases: open-end and closed-end. An open-end lease requires you to pay any difference between the projected residual, or remaining, value of the vehicle and its actual market value at the end of the lease term. In other words, if the leased vehicle depreciates faster than anticipated, you’ll have to pay the difference between the expected value and the true market value at the end of the lease. The projected value of the vehicle is included in the lease agreement at inception. Open-end leases are still offered, but they have largely been replaced by closed-end leases.

Also known as a walkaway lease, the closed-end lease specifies the price at which you may, but are not compelled to, purchase the vehicle at the end of the lease. Since you don’t have to buy it, you can walk away from that vehicle and enter into another lease agreement for a new vehicle. A closed-end lease shifts the risk of overestimating the residual value of the vehicle onto the lessor, who agrees to absorb any losses that stem from rapid depreciation. You are, however, responsible for any above-normal mileage or wear. Some other facts that you should be aware of concerning leases are below.

You must normally have very good credit to qualify for a lease. A lease with a low down payment exposes the lessor to greater risk of substantial loss in the event of a default on the obligation.

Lease payments are established to provide a return on the lessor’s capital that’s invested in the leased vehicle. The lower the return that a lessor will accept, the more you’ll benefit from the lower lease payments.

Lessors normally charge a substantial penalty in the event that you decide to terminate the lease early. Therefore, only enter into a lease if you’re prepared to fulfill the terms completely.

Leases typically specify a maximum number of miles that the vehicle can be driven before excess-mileage charges begin to accrue. Generally, 15,000 annual miles are allowed. You can attempt to negotiate a higher limit if you expect to exceed the mileage allowance.

Although manufacturer defects and routine scheduled maintenance are normally covered, other costs of operating the vehicle (such as registration, insurance coverage and non-routine repairs) are yours to pay.

Most leases require a nonrefundable down payment, usually from $1,000 to $2,000, depending on the value of the vehicle. A security deposit, which is generally refundable, may also be required. Sales taxes, if applicable, are usually added to each lease payment.
A documentation loan is any loan that requires full information substantiating a borrower's claims of income and assets in order to gain financing. The vast majority of loans are documentation loans. Lenders use the documents provided during the underwriting process to assure the application for financing is accurate and to further determine the terms of a loan contract. "No doc" loans, in contrast, require no verification. No doc loans are also known as "high risk" loans, and they may even violate standard lending principles. Therefore, it is best to attain a documentation loan when possible by providing necessary loan information.

Income Verification

The first thing you will need to supply a lender in order to prove you can afford a loan is verification of your income. There are several ways to verify income, and each lender may have specific requirements. One option that works for most lenders is supplying at least two years of tax information. For example, submit copies of the past two years' worth of W-2 statements, which record your official income. If you are self-employed, you will need to supply Schedule C statements instead.

Lenders may also accept paycheck stubs or verification of income from your employer. However, many lenders would like to see that you have been earning an income equal to your current level for at least two years. The best scenario is to show continued employment for two years with the same employer with an increasing income.

Asset Verification

Lenders will consider your assets when reviewing your full financial strength. Not all lenders need to know your "net worth" in order to extend your loan. However, if you are placing any collateral down on a loan, you will need to verify the value of that collateral through full documentation. For example, if you are taking out a home equity loan, the lender may require an up-to-date home appraisal and a statement from your primary lender. The primary lender's statement will reflect how much equity you have earned in the home through paying down your mortgage. This tells the second lender just how much it can expect to recover if you were ever to default on the loan and the lender needed to seize your asset.

Liens and Liabilities

Lenders cannot count your assets alone in order to determine your financial stability. Your debts, liens and liabilities will also be taken into account. For example, when you apply for a mortgage, your mortgage lender will need to know if you also owe money to a student loan lender and a car loan lender. This can affect your ability to afford a new loan based on your current income. Liabilities can be found through a simple credit check. Your credit report will reflect all of your debts and liens against your property. A credit check is completed without any documentation from you. All you will need to supply is your Social Security, Tax Payer Identification or Credit Report number. The lender will carry out the credit check with your approval.

Low or No Documentation Loan

A low or no documentation loan requires very little verification of the claims made on an application. Documentation loans require a borrower to submit proof of income, proof of assets and other documents prior to having a loan move through the underwriting process. A no or low documentation loan requires none of these items. Instead, the borrower must place only enough money as a down payment in order to receive the loan. In exchange for the relative ease of the lending process, the borrower may have to accept higher interest rates and financing charges as well as a lower loan-to-value ratio on an asset.
A Federal Pell Grant is a monetary award that is commonly given to low-income undergraduate students who have yet to earn a bachelor's degree. However, under certain circumstances, a post-baccalaureate student may be awarded a Pell grant. For example, students taking post-baccalaureate programs that lead to teacher certification may be eligible for a Pell grant. Students have the option of using their grants at one of the 5,400 participating schools. A school is required to tell each student in writing how much the award is and how and when payments will be disbursed. Once the payment is received, the school must apply the funds to the student's account, pay the student directly or combine both methods.

Eligibility for the grant is dependent upon the amount the student contributes to their family, the tuition at the selected school, enrollment status and whether the student attends for a full academic year or less. According to the US Department of Education, the maximum award is $5,500 for the 2010 to 2011 school year. Students under 24 who have had a parent die as a result of military service in Iraq or Afghanistan since Sept. 11, 2001, are eligible for the maximum reward. Students are not allowed to receive grant money from more than one school at a time.

How long can a student receive the federal Pell grant?

Qualifying students may receive the federal Pell grant for the equivalent of eighteen full-time semesters. It is available to undergraduate students and specific graduate students working toward a degree in teaching. Income eligibility is determined each year by filling out a Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). Satisfactory academic performance is also required to receive the federal Pell grant on a continual basis. A minimum grade point average equivalent to a C is required each semester, and the student must also accumulate credits toward graduation at a rate of at least two-thirds of the total credits attempted.
You can elect voluntary repossession when facing default on an auto loan. This may seem counterintuitive, but it can present loss-mitigation options, meaning you will actually save money over defaulting the normal way. You may also have a chance to save your credit with voluntary repossession over involuntary repossession. To gain these benefits, borrowers who know they will absolutely face default soon often elect simply to surrender their asset.

Voluntary Repossession Is Still Repossession

Before considering the benefits of voluntarily surrendering your car, you should realize this is not a way to get out of repossession. When you take an auto loan, you use the car itself as collateral on the debt. If you default, the lender seizes the car to make up the difference. In a typical repossession, the lender will not tell you when or where it will take your car away. You will simply have the asset seized, usually at an inconvenient time. Voluntary repossession just means you have agreed to turn the asset in yourself at a given time to a given place. You have still defaulted on the loan.

Voluntary Repossession Saves Costs

The main reason people elect voluntary repossession is to save a small amount of money. If you allow a lender to repossess your vehicle, the lender will send an agent to do this. The agent charges you a fee to take your car to the lot, and then you will pay for each day it is housed at the lot. The lender does not cover any of these costs, and they can add up to several hundreds of dollars. You can cut out the middle man when you know you have defaulted and will have your car repossessed. Just tell the lender there is no reason to send an agent. Then arrange for a time and place to turn in your car.

Voluntary Repossession Saves Credit

You will have a record of default on your credit report if you elect voluntary repossession. You cannot stop this from occurring, but you can mitigate some of the other problems you may face on your credit score. By contacting a lender right away to make arrangements, you can ask the lender not to continue reporting your missed payments in exchange for turning in the asset quickly. Most lenders will be willing to work with you because voluntary repossession saves them money as well.

Voluntary Repossession Reduces Stress

One of the biggest challenges involved in default is stress. Borrowers often get phone calls at work or school, and they may even have repossession agents showing up at their homes. This can be stressful on the family of a borrower as well. Instead of allowing this to occur, you can simply cooperate with the lender who is trying to recover money from you. Arrange a payment schedule to cover the cost of the default, and take your car in yourself. Lenders will be much more likely to offer you options like a payment schedule if you have responded to their calls and notified them of your intent to default.

Can the military take your pay for a voluntary repossession?

Voluntary repossession is a form of default and repossession. The main differences, and advantages for that matter, are you do not have to pay repossession fees, and the repossession will appear as voluntary on your credit report. This can minimize the amount of financial damage you endure as a result of your default, but it does not excuse you from terms of default. If you still owe money on the loan after repossession, you will have to make those payments. This can include a docking of your pay, even military pay, to repay your obligation to the lender.

Will voluntary repossession have an effect on using my VA loan?

Your past experience with voluntary repossession may affect your VA home loan if the default occurred on a property; specifically, it may be problematic if you forfeited a home with an active VA loan through voluntary repossession. As a general rule, any default should be at least two years old, and the applicant must have 12 months of positive credit history to be eligible for a VA loan. The VA will consider an applicant with a previous foreclosure or bankruptcy. If you defaulted on a VA home loan in the past, however, you must ensure that the VA loan was repaid in full and you have no further liability to the loan prior to seeking a new VA loan.

Do you have to advertise a voluntary repossession?

You do not have to advertise a voluntary repossession. When you forfeit your vehicle back to the lender, the lender will attempt to sell the vehicle for the highest amount possible in order to recover on the debt. You may be financially liable for any difference in the sales price and the remaining balance on the loan. If you advertise the car for auction, you may have a better chance of selling it at a high rate. However, this is not your responsibility, so it is up to you whether to pursue this option or allow the lender to do it on their own.

Does the FHA allow borrowers to have voluntary repossessions of vehicles?

When you apply for an FHA home loan, any previous voluntary repossessions on your record could harm your application. The FHA generally requires good to great credit. Since a repossession of any type, even a voluntary one, will damage your credit, it can also harm your chance of securing an FHA loan. Fortunately, though, a voluntary repossession will not affect your credit after a few years. If you have been current on all your loans for at least 12 months, have recovered your credit score to over 700 and have resolved any liability in connection with your repossession, you may be eligible for an FHA loan.
Online banks have been growing in popularity in recent years. Many people are forgoing the traditional brick-and-mortar banks in order to take advantage of some of the benefits that online banks have to offer. Here are a few things to consider about online banks and what features you can receive by working with them.

Instant Account Access

One common feature that you will find with all online banks is that you can access your account instantly. You will be able to get online any computer and login to your bank account. This will allow you to see a much money you have, what payments you have received, and what checks have cleared. Many online banks also make it possible for you to access your account from any PDA or cell phone. This provides you with a level of convenience that can be very beneficial to you.

Safety

Another benefit that you can get by working with an online bank is safety. Many people believe that it is not safe to do all of your business online with this type of bank. However, many people would also argue that this is actually safer than the traditional alternative. With a regular bank, you are going to receive paper statements and copies of cancelled checks. This is one of the easiest ways for identity thieves to get your information. They can simply look in your trash and find a copy of your bank statement. However, with online banks, everything can be conducted online. You are not going to have to worry about shredding your documents or anyone finding your cancelled checks. Because of this, your bank account is going to be very safe.

No Fees

One of the best things about online banks is that many of them do not charge fees. You could potentially get a checking account that allows you to pay all your bills online and you will not have to pay any fees to the bank. Some of them do not even have fees for bounced checks.

Check Images

When you are working with an online bank, you should also be able to get access to images of the checks that you have written. This way, instead of seeing simply an amount and a check number, you will actually be able to see a picture of the check that you wrote. Many times, this can jog your memory if you forgot to write down the information off of the check that you wrote.

Transfers

Another benefit that you can get from online banks is that you can transfer money to other accounts. This allows you to link up to another bank account from a bank that is located in your local area. This way, if you need to deposit cash, you can take it to your local bank and then transfer the money to your online bank quickly. You will also be able to easily transfer money to an investment account or some other type of account that you have.

Thrift Bank

A thrift bank is a type of banking institution that is generally smaller than a full-service bank. The thrift bank puts an emphasis on taking deposits from customers and using that money to issue mortgages. The money from the mortgage interest that is generated is used to provide interest to the depositors of the bank. Although this is the basic business model of the thrift bank, some thrift banks have expanded to offer additional features such as checking accounts. This is a type of banking that has been around for many years and is also known as a "savings and loan."
A credit history is an important tool for many reasons. If you plan to apply for a loan for a home, car, school loans or start a business, your credit history is the tool that a lender will use to determine if you are a credit worthy borrower. Your credit report is a record of your payments. Timely payments will ensure that you have a good credit rating and delinquencies will give you a poor rating. Learning how to build your credit can be a challenge for many people. Until you build your credit, lenders will be reluctant to approve you for credit. Or, a lender may approve you for credit but they will charge you higher fees and rates to compensate for their risk.

Step 1: Get a Secured Credit Card

A secured credit card uses your cash as collateral. For example, they will lend $500 at the start and they require that the borrower deposit the money with the cardholder. Then they will provide you with a $500 line of credit and you can charge your card and pay it down over time.

The biggest benefit of a secured card is that they will report your payments to the three major credit bureaus. This can help to improve your overall history and provide you with good credit, but you will need to make sure that the payments are always made on time.

Step 2: Retail Credit Cards and Gas Cards

Even if you have no credit history, credit cards issued by major retailers and gas companies can be easy to obtain. They carry high interest rates and low credit lines, however, they can be a simple and easy way for you to build credit. Again, be sure to pay the bill on time each month.

Step 3: Responsible Credit Management in College

If you are a full-time college student, there are credit card companies that can help you. You must be conservative and learn how to manage your debt, especially when you are new to it. Many college students spend more than they can and end up with a lot of debt. Be responsible and limit your cards and payments to a comfortable monthly payment.

Step 4: Pay All Your Bills On Time

Paying your bills on time will help your credit report rating. If you are building credit from scratch, be sure to make your payments your first priority. Your payment history will impact your credit rating, whether it's a utility bill or college loan. If you miss a payment, it can blemish your credit report for years. A good way to avoid forgetting about payments is to paying your bills electronically. Many banks use the auto-payment option. The biggest drawback is that you can forget how much money you have in your account, so be sure to keep track of all your payments.
You can use a settlement option to cut credit card debt, but this is not always the best option you have. Consider all the downsides of consolidating prior to looking into your options. You may find the downsides are too great to go through the process. On the other hand, you may find the benefits are great enough to counter any concerns you have about the challenges posed by consolidation.

Con: Simpler Options May be Available

If you can change your financial decisions and pay off your debt on schedule, it is always the best option. For example, you may have gotten yourself into debt by overspending. By cutting back your spending and making lifestyle changes, you can successfully pay off your debts without the hassle and cost of settlement. This will save you money and save your credit in the long term. It will also help teach you the tools to prevent credit card problems in the future.

Con: Cheaper Options may be Available

Look into the real costs of settlement. You may hear that you can save thousands of dollars through settlement, but this is not always the case. Most individuals choosing to settle a debt will be using a new loan in order to do so. You can take a new loan from a settlement company and pay off all of your credit card balances. But you will still have to pay the new company, and this rate can be exponentially higher than your original credit card fees. Add to this the loan origination costs, and you may find yourself worse off than before the settlement.

Pro: It can Save a Credit Record

You may be in a situation where you have few options. For example, if you have a large debt and have recently lost your job, you may be facing default on your cards or, perhaps worse, default on another loan due to your credit card debt. In this case, it may be necessary to think short term. By settling the debt, you can buy yourself time with your new loan. You can ensure the new loan has low monthly payments or a grace period to help you get back on your feet. In this case, avoiding default becomes the primary concern, and a settlement can help you do just that.

Pro: It can Save Years of Stress

Some people who find themselves in credit card debt just want to be done with it. They may have made bad decisions, been suffering from a low income or otherwise unable to keep their finances in line. Rather than spending years in negotiations with the lenders trying to pay off the debts, they would prefer to settle it all and be done with the process. In this case, settlement can achieve the goal. If you have the money to settle out of pocket without using an agent, settlement will save you years of stress and lots of money over paying off the cards on time, in full, plus fees.

What will happen to unpaid credit card debt if I leave the country?

does not simply disappear because you cannot pay it. If you leave the country, the credit card company you owe will likely send your debt to collections. Collections officers will contact your known acquaintances, including your former place of work or your family, in order to get you to pay. Each state has a statute of limitations on credit card debt, but this limit is typically in excess of five years.
A credit card debt consolidation loan can help you escape the pressures of collections agencies, save your credit and save you a good deal of money. However, whether or not all of these goals are achieved depends on the loan itself. Some debt consolidation loans can end up doing more harm than good. Look for these features to assure your loan is beneficial and affordable.

Low Interest Rates

The number one thing to look for in any consolidation loan is a low interest rate. With a consolidation loan, you are paying off your existing debts and adding your balance to a new loan. If the interest rate on your new loan is higher than the rate on your old debt, you have received no real benefit. You should never consolidate to a higher interest loan. However, with a good consolidation loan, the new lender offers you a "wholesale" interest rate for consolidating so many loans at once. Since you are moving to a higher limit loan with the new lender, the lender will ideally offer you a lower interest rate. You will benefit, and the new lender still profits because your payments will be high due to the limits of your loan.

Low Financing Costs

Some consolidation companies get creative with their interest rates by reducing the stated rate. However, they apply the reduction in another place. For example, the lender may try to raise initiation fees, online payment fees, fees to pay the loan early and similar issues. Always read the fine print in a contract to look for any hidden consolidation fees.

Restructuring Options

When you first consolidate, your immediate needs will be to avoid collection, save credit problems and otherwise deal with the short-term consequences of credit card debt. However, once you recover from this initial set back, your needs will change. For example, you may have credit card debt because you were out of work for an extended period of time. In the future, you anticipate getting a new job. You would then be able to make much higher payments toward your debt balance. Look for a consolidation loan that has refinancing options in the future without huge penalties.

Credit Repair Services

If you go through the process of consolidating loans, you should receive more than a bill. Determine what the new lender is going to do to help you actually repair your credit and grow financially from the situation. The best credit card debt consolidation companies have existing relationship with your current lenders. The lenders can negotiate with your current lenders to avoid many fees that would typically come out of entering a debt servicing arrangement.

For example, when you close your credit cards at once, you may see your credit score drop. However, your lender may be able to negotiate with creditors to simply have any record of your credit card removed permanently from your credit report. This will erase any history of missed payments. Ask your potential consolidation lender if credit repair and negotiation is an option.

How much do credit card debt consolidation loans cost?

There are several hidden fees associated with credit card debt consolidation loans. The first is the origination fee. It is used to pay your loan agent. This fee is typically between 1 and 5 percent of the total amount you consolidate. There will also be an interest rate, which should be low enough to counter the cost of consolidating. If your loan costs plus interest will exceed the cost of paying your loans in full as they stand today, be very wary of taking the loan consolidation loan. You may find yourself in a bad financial situation after the transfer.

Are credit card debt consolidation services worth the expense?

Credit card debt consolidation services should be designed to save you money, but few really meet this goal. In many cases, the expense of consolidating and paying off your debts under a new loan will be equal to, or greater, than the cost of paying them off. The consolidation services are only worth the money if you are facing a drastic financial problem, such as foreclosure, bankruptcy or default on your loans. The service may also pay for itself if the company you work with has excellent credit repair options as well.

How can I tell if a credit card debt consolidation service is a scam?

Unfortunately, it can be hard to know for sure whether you are working with a legitimate credit card debt consolidation service. However, there are some basic methods to expose fraud early in the process. Start by researching the address, phone number and website URL of the company. All should be registered to the same organization, and all should be registered in a state or local database such as the Chamber of Commerce as well. If you have any doubts after this initial research, ask for a recommendation from your bank, financial advisor or attorney.
Stock warrants are similar to options because they give an investor the option to purchase a share of stock at a given price at some point in the future. The true difference between a warrant and an option is the issuer. An option is issued by the market exchange; a warrant is issued by the company offering the stock.

Why Offer Warrants?

Companies offer warrants on their shares when they want to boost investor confidence. They are predicting the value of their stock will go up; if it does, then investors will have greater confidence in the stock in the future. For this reason, warrants are often issued at the same time a company issues a new stock.

Why Buy Warrants?

As an investor, you have the opportunity to earn a very high return on investment with warrants. Warrants are high risk, high reward certificates that are transferable and sellable. This makes them very flexible, and they can be attractive to investors. They are popular with hedge funds and strategists as well.

How do you exercise a stock warrant?

A stock warrant is always issued with an exercise date and price. American warrants can be exercised any time before the exercise date at the exercise price. With European warrants, you can only exercise the warrant on the exact exercise date. When you exercise a warrant, you can notify your broker or the issuing company with either your put or call order. Warrants are issued directly by companies. As a result, when you exercise the document, the company will be the one that issues you the shares directly.
Gross profit is essentially the profit made from a company before interest expenses, taxes, and dividend expenses. This is the gross sum of money made in a calendar year as income.

Other names

Gross profit can be defined also, commonly, as EBIT and NOPAT. Earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) is commonly calculated as gross profit. This is a measure that is used for year by year comparisons to analyze the company's earnings performance based on a different capital structure and different tax rates. Net operating profit after taxes (NOPAT) is the same thing as (EBIT) except that it takes taxes out to make the net profit without regard to interest expense.

For example, a company may have net income of 100 million dollars and interest expense of 1 million dollars and taxes of 5 million. The earning before interest and taxes (EBIT) would be 106 million dollars. The net operating profits after tax (NOPAT) would be 101 million dollars. This is calculated by disregarding interest expense leaving roughly 5 million in taxes subtracted from gross profit of 106 million, leaving the difference of 101 million dollars.

Gross Earnings

A company's gross earnings is an important financial metric used to gauge the strength of the company. Many investors turn to gross earnings to see exactly how much money is being made by a company over a specific period. In order to calculate gross earnings, an individual can look at an income statement that is released by the company. By taking the total sales of the company and subtracting the cost of goods sold from that number, the gross earnings can be determined.

While this number is important, it should not be the only thing that an individual looks at when evaluating a company. This number does not take into consideration several other things that can be critical to a company's success. For example, this number does not factor in debt or the cost of the debt. Financial analysts know the importance of both equity and debt financing for the success of a company, and if you do not take this into consideration, you could make a bad judgment when choosing a company to invest in.

Companies strive to increase their gross earnings because they are a measure of profitability since the cost of the goods sold is taken out.
Learning about bond basics can help you understand one of the most popular types of investment that is available in the market today. Bonds can benefit investors in a number of different ways, but they are definitely not for everyone. Here are a few things to consider about who should invest in bonds.

Fixed Interest

When you purchase a bond, you are going to be able to receive a fixed interest rate over the life of the bond. This means that every month, you are going to receive an interest payment from the issuer of the bond.

Principal Return

In addition to receiving a fixed interest payment, you will also be able to receive your original investment back at the end of the bond term.

Safety

Bonds are considered to be very safe as an investment. If you invest in corporate bonds, you are considered a creditor to the company. This means that even if they go bankrupt, you will have a good chance of getting your investment back.

Investors

Most of the time, individual that are living on a fixed income will be able to benefit from this type of investment the most as it can supplement their income. If you are trying to invest with a short time frame, these can also be beneficial because of their safety and steady interest.

Flower Bond

The flower bond was a type of bond that could be purchased by an individual in order to provide money for paying estate taxes. When an individual with an estate passes away, estate taxes will be charged by the federal government if the value of the estate is over a certain amount. In order to prepare for the taxes and lessen the burden on their families, individuals could purchase these bonds, which would pay their face value when the bondholder passed away. This type of investment is no longer available; flower bonds stopped being paid in 1998.
Investing in an REIT ETF will allow you to get involved in the real estate market with a minimal investment. If you are trying to choose between REIT ETFs, there are several factors that you will need to consider. Here are the basics of how to choose the best REIT ETF.

Management

When you are looking at an REIT ETF, one of the first things that you will want to look at is the management situation. Every ETF is going to have a management team in place to make the individual investment decisions for investors. You want to learn as much as you can about the management team that is in charge of the ETF. You want to look at their history and determine if they have been successful in this field in the past. You also want to look at the company that is offering the ETF to see if they are a leader in the investment industry. Typically, you will not want to get involved with a company that does not have much experience in the investment arena.

Diversification

One of the major advantages of investing in an REIT ETF is diversification. You will be purchasing shares of a very diversified portfolio of real estate investments. When choosing between all of the REIT ETFs out there, you want to look at the level of diversification that they have. You want to find an REIT ETF that has a high level of diversification in the portfolio. Look at the holdings of the REITs to see what type of properties they have invested in. Ideally, you would like to get involved with a fund that has as much diversification as possible.

Earnings

When comparing REIT ETFs, you will want to make sure that you look at earnings. Look at how much money each REIT ETF has brought in over the past year. You will also want to compare the performance over a longer period of time, such as the last five years. Ultimately, you are investing in an REIT ETF to make money. This means that you want to find an REIT ETF that has a good history of bringing in earnings for investors.

Expense Ratio

Something else that you will want to take into consideration is the expense ratio of the fund. Every ETF is going to have some type of expense ratio associated with it. This is the money that is charged to investors to cover the operation expenses of the fund. The expense ratio is going to pay the salaries of the fund managers and the rest of the administration staff. It will pay for the rest of the administration costs for the fund as well. While many investors do not pay much attention to the amount of money that is charged for the expense ratio, it can have a dramatic effect on your overall returns. You want to find an ETF that has the lowest expense ratio available.

Existing Home Sales

Existing home sales is a statistic that is released by the National Association of Realtors. This is one of the most important statistics when it comes to gauging the strength of the economy overall. This statistic is used to gauge how many existing homes have been sold over the previous month. This statistic is released on the 25th of each month in most cases. When this statistic is released, it has an effect on many different financial markets. For example, certain stocks will increase or decline based on this information. In the forex (foreign exchange) market, the value of the dollar will also fluctuate.

Real Estate Investment Group

A real estate investment group is an organization that has the purpose of making real estate investment readily available for investors. This type of group will actively seek out or build properties that can be sold to investors. Once the investors purchase the property, this group will also take care of the maintenance and day-to-day operations of running the property. In exchange for this service, the investors give a portion of the rent to the real estate investment group. This type of investment is essentially likely a real estate version of a mutual fund or an ETF (exchange-traded fund) with the management functions.
General retirement investing involves using standard vehicles to put aside money for non-working years. Ideally, retirement investments will offer tax-free earnings or at least tax deferments until the time of withdrawal. The idea behind retirement investing is to bolster available income in post-employment years to go beyond Social Security and even pensions. General retirement investing vehicles can vary greatly. Those that can offer tax breaks include 401ks and IRAs. Other investments may also be used to augment retirement savings and available income.
Many people that are learning about estate planning commonly ask "What is probate?" Here are the basics of probate and how it works.

Probate

The term probate refers to the method of distribution of an individual's assets after they die. The estate will be taken before the local probate court and a judge will preside over the distribution of the assets.

Testate vs. Intestate

When the individual that passed away has a will, this is known as testate. The judge is going to then review the will and make sure that it is legitimate. As long as they do not see any problems with the well, they will usually uphold it and distribute the assets according to what the deceased had placed on the will.

If the individual did not have a will when they died, this is known as intestate. In this case, the court is going to appoint someone to handle the estate of the individual. They will collect all of the claims against the estate and use any assets to pay creditors. At that point, the judge is going to refer to personal experience as well as state law and order to determine the best way to distribute the assets of the deceased.

Does all property have to be probated when a person dies?

Not all property has to be probated when an individual dies. There are many different types of assets that can be considered non-probate assets. For example, if you set up a trust, the assets you put into it will avoid the probate process. If you own property jointly with another individual through joint tenancy, the property can pass to the survivor without having to go through probate. You can also set up payable-on-death accounts, which will allow the money in the accounts to pass to the beneficiaries immediately when you die without going through probate.
You are eligible for military reserve pay if you served in the National Guard or Reserve once you reach age 60. However, not all individual service members will qualify. Your qualification depends on your years of service, type of service and when you served. The formulas for computing how much you may be eligible are complicated. Here is a basic list of the factors the pay is based on.

Years of Service

You must serve at least 20 years prior to becoming eligible for military reserve retirement pay. A qualified year is one in which a service member earned at least 60 active points or 75 inactive points. You are eligible to earn one point for each day of service in the Reserves or National Guard, up to 365. In leap years, you will need to have 366 days per year. At least eight years must be served as a member of the Active Reserve. This was changed in 2002 when the active requirement reduced to only six years. You will additionally only be required to serve six active years if the years of service were between October 5, 1994, and September 30, 2001.

Early Retirement Options

As of 2009, there is a new early retirement option in place. In this system, you may be able to retire as early as age 50. You can reduce your minimum retirement age. The new provision only applies to new active duty service after the provision was passed; this starts on January 28, 2008. The maximum reduction is 10 years, so you will not be able to retire before the age of 50, regardless of your total number of years of active duty service. Further, just because you receive retirement benefits does not mean you will qualify for health benefits. You must still wait until the age 60 to meet that qualification.

Calculating Retirement Benefits

The military uses a formula to calculate how much you will receive in benefits. The formula can become quite complicated with several provisions now in place, but the basis is still simple. Calculate the total number of years of service you gain credit for by dividing your total retirement credits by 360. There are two basic formulas to calculate your benefits from here. One is called the "Final Basic Pay" formula, and the other is the "High 3 Formula."

If you entered the service prior to September 8, 1980, use the final basic pay formula to calculate benefits. Multiple your years of service, found in step one, by 2.5 percent. Do this up to a maximum of 75 percent, then multiply the result by the basic pay you were receiving at the end of your career.

If you entered the service after September 8, 1980, use the High 3 formula. Multiply your years of service, found in step one, by 2.5 percent. Do this up to a maximum of 75 percent, then multiply the result by the average of the highest three years of pay you received while serving.

Military Reserve Retirement Pay Eligibility

In order to be eligible for military reserve pay, you must have at least 20 years of service to the National Guard or the Reserves. At least eight of these years must be active reserve years. A year of service is any year when you earned at least 60 active duty retirement credits, or 75 inactive duty credits. You earn one credit for each day of service. Once you have accumulated 20 years of credit and are at least 60 years old, you can begin to collect pay. You may be eligible for early retirement based on the year you entered service and how many active duty years you served.

Military Reserve Retirement Pay Systems

Military reserve pay is based on a calculation of the retirement point system. You earn one point per day of service in the military, up to 365 points per year. Your total points earned is divided by 360 at the end of your career to determine how many qualified years you served. Once you know your qualified years, you will use either the final basic pay or high-three system to calculate your pay. Final basic pay is used if you entered the service prior to September 8, 1980. The high three is used afterward. In both scenarios, you multiply your qualified years by 2.5 percent, with a 75 percent max. Then, use this percentage times your end pay. Or, average the highest 36 months pay in order to determine your benefit.

Formulas for Computing Reserve Retired Pay

Reserve retired pay is calculated based on one of two formulas depending on the year you entered service. If you entered prior to September 8, 1980, you will use the final pay formula. If you entered after this day, you will use the High-3 formula. In both options, you first determine your qualified years of service by dividing your total number of retirement credits by 360.Then, multiply this formula by 2.5 percent per year up to 75 percent.

If you are on the final pay formula, multiply the total by either. Or, if you are on the High-3 formula, average of the highest 36 months of your pay.
Life estate deeds give an individual the right to enjoy all benefits of ownership of property while they are alive. As soon as the individual dies, the life estate ends, and ownership benefits seamlessly pass onto the remainder person on the estate. This tool is often used in estate planning to make sure a home is effectively transferred to a child.

For example, John wants to pass his home onto John, Jr. He wants to avoid probate and lawsuits in doing this after his death. As such, he passes the home onto John, Jr., today. However, John needs to live in the home for the time being. He establishes a life estate deed. This allows him to live in the home and gain all the benefits, and costs, of home ownership until the day of his death. At that point, John's life estate expires. John, Jr., does not have to inherit the house through an estate. Instead, he is already the named owner of the home, and he can begin receiving ownership benefits immediately.

Can a life estate deed once given be revoked or withdrawn?

Once a contract for a life estate deed has been signed, it is difficult to revoke it. The parties listed in the contract would have to initiate the revocation because they are the lawful owners of the property. Another withdrawal option is to determine the parties were not in a sound legal mind or committed fraud when the contract was signed. This is very difficult to prove. Most cases involve a lengthy lawsuit and very expensive legal costs because life estate deeds are carefully drawn and executed.
An insolvent estate is an estate in bankruptcy. When the owner of the estate passed,they left behind a greater amount of debt than equity. This means the estate must be sold off in order to repay debts, but there may still be outstanding debts to pay. Depending on the structure of the debts, the inheritors of the estate may be asked to repay the loans. A judge will work to cancel or reduce debts in most cases in order to repay all outstanding balances with money earned from liquidating the estate.

Disadvantages of Using a Probate for an Insolvent Estate

If you decide to take an insolvent estate through probate, you will have the protection of the court each step of the way. This is the main reason beneficiaries decide to take the probate route to resolve an insolvent estate. However, the protection comes at a cost. You will likely find yourself deep in debt to attorneys and the court at the end of an insolvent estate probate process because the costs are only exacerbated by the insolvency.

No Nonintervention Powers

When you enter probate on a solvent estate, you have the power to ask for nonintervention of the court on certain issues. This allows you to resolve some debts on your own simply by repaying creditors out of the estate. You will save money by handling issues on your own. When an estate is insolvent, most jurisdictions will not permit nonintervention.

This means every single transaction must be run through the court. Similar to a bankruptcy proceeding, a probate on an insolvent estate freezes the assets and lets the court decide how to spend the money left behind. You will find yourself at the mercy of the court in even the smallest transaction, which can consume your time and money.

Insufficient Assets to Pay for Attorney

In probate, the attorney and court fees to resolve an insolvent estate are paid out of the estate. The attorney is paid first, and the remainder of the estate goes to pay off creditors. The creditors’ shares of the pot shrink as attorney fees go up. In some cases, the attorney fees may climb so high that nothing is left for the creditors.

Insufficient funds can be a problem in small estates where only a few thousand dollars are left to repay debts, even if the debts are small. Attorney fees will quickly eat up those few thousand dollars. You will be left with few options. One is to handle the probate and try to handle the debts on your own. The other is to enter probate and pay attorney fees out of pocket.

Time to Resolve Disputes

When you handle dispute resolution on an insolvent estate yourself, you can move at your own pace. You decide which creditors to engage first, and you decide which assets to liquidate immediately. You hand all of this over to the court when you enter probate. The court will then establish it’s timeline. This may, or may not, work with your goals to end the process quickly. Probate can take years to resolve an insolvent estate. While this time is daunting and the cost can be high, you should also keep in mind the alternative. If you decide to “go it alone” on resolving the issue, you lose the protection of the court. It can take just as long for you to personally verify and repay all debts as it would take the court. Do not let time be the reason to avoid probate, instead keep in mind it can be a serious disadvantage to go through the court system.

Alternatives for Handling Insolvent Estates

An insolvent estate does not have enough assets to cover liabilities at the time of the decedent’s death. As a result, the beneficiaries of the estate will inherent nothing. It is up to the beneficiaries to determine how the insolvency will be resolved. There is no correct way to handle the process, and each individual will have to choose based on the circumstances of the individual estate in question. The size of the estate, the types of debts remaining and the resources of the beneficiary will all come into play.

Choose Based on the Estate Size

For a relatively small estate, with only a few thousand dollars in assets at the time of death, the best method will be to either ignore the liabilities or to close them personally. As a beneficiary, you have no actual obligation to ensure debts are paid. You are not named on the debts, and the credit of the decedent will have no impact on you. This will not stop creditors from contacting you, however, so it may be best to resolve the estate personally.

You can liquidate the assets in the estate and repay the creditors a portion of the remaining cash equivalent to the portion of debt the decedent owed the creditor. If you were to move through probate, it is unlikely the estate would have enough cash to pay an attorney and still repay creditors, and you may be stuck with the bill. For a larger estate, probate may be a better option. By putting the estate in probate, you can remove yourself from personally making any decisions. The assets of the estate are liquidated, and attorney and court fees are paid out of this sum. Then, the remaining cash is used to repay creditors.

Choose Based on Types of Debts

If the debts in an insolvent estate are largely secured, it may be easy to resolve the debts by surrendering the collateral. You can carry out the process of voluntarily surrendering the assets, resolving the debts one by one. However, if the debts are largely unsecured, it will be harder to pay them off by surrendering collateral. Instead, you would have to liquidate each asset yourself, collecting the cash earned and repaying creditors personally. In this instance, entering probate may be a better option. The court can handle the liquidation process for you, and the court will determine how to negotiate repayment.

Choose Based on Personal Resources

If you have limited resources to handle the dissolution of an estate, it is best to avoid probate. Probate always runs the risk of resulting in legal fees. Without the cash to pay, probate is not a good option to you. However, if you have the cash on hand to cover this expense, probate can save you a lot of time and hassle. In the end, you may owe nothing at all.

Procedures for Handling Debts in Insolvent Estates

Insolvent estates are those where the decedent’s assets are not sufficient to cover debts after death. As a result, there will be no inheritance left to the beneficiaries of the estate, and those beneficiaries may further have a legal obligation to help resolve the debts. Thankfully, less than 10 percent of all estates are insolvent, so it is not likely you will have to face the problem. If you do, however, there are three main ways to handle debts in an insolvent estate.

Ignore the Problem

While creditors may try to convince you otherwise, in most states you have no obligation to meet the debts incurred by a decedent’s estate. The creditors can try to recover by contacting you or the court, but you have inherited none of the estate if it is insolvent, so you are not legally obligated to any of the property or the debts. The effectiveness of this strategy may partly depend on your state of residence and whether you inherited any property while the decedent was living. You may want to consult an attorney to learn if the creditors could attempt to contact you in any way and what rights you have if they do.

Handle the Debts Personally

If you have received the entire estate and found it to be insolvent, you may personally attempt to resolve debts. You can contact each creditor to verify debts owed and offer to surrender assets, to resolve those debts. This strategy can be time consuming. Furthermore, many creditors will attempt to take advantage of you in this situation. They are aware you are not the original debtor, so they may attempt to assess fees and charges against the estate and claim these charges were part of the original contract.

If you are not careful to follow the contracts and verify all debts, then you can end up paying more than is legally necessary for each debt. Always start by verifying all debts, assuring none are past the statute of limitations and knowing the legal obligation the estate has to repay any of the debts prior to negotiating with creditors.

Use Probate for the Debts

You may want to enter probate in order to resolve the debts. The main advantage of this is you have a court system to assure all debts are lawful and you are not overpaying. The court will work to reduce the total debts owed so the estate can cover it’s liabilities. Unfortunately, however, the court does not recognize your legal rights. As the beneficiary, you will not have the ability to handle any debts personally. Every single debt must go through the court, which can drive up court costs and probate expenses. Probate can be a very expensive process and this can add to the overall expenses of the estate itself.
General retirement investing involves using standard vehicles to put aside money for non-working years. Ideally, retirement investments will offer tax-free earnings or at least tax deferments until the time of withdrawal. The idea behind retirement investing is to bolster available income in post-employment years to go beyond Social Security and even pensions. General retirement investing vehicles can vary greatly. Those that can offer tax breaks include 401ks and IRAs. Other investments may also be used to augment retirement savings and available income.
If you are considering purchasing separate car insurance as a teenager, you should be aware of the positives and negatives this option offers when compared to staying on your parents' plan. For the most part, there are relatively few benefits to obtaining your own insurance. However, if your goal is to set yourself up for benefits in the future, obtaining your own plan can be worth the added cost and hassle.

Con: Difficulty Obtaining Insurance

Teen drivers are statistically the most dangerous on the road. There are a number of factors that lead to this statistic, including the fact that teen drivers are inexperienced and more likely to be distracted. Because of these problems, car insurance companies like to tie a teen driver into a plan with his or her parents. The philosophy behind this step is simple: insurance companies feel drivers are more likely to be cautious if they are responsible to their parents. Further, car insurance companies cannot exist by insuring only risky drivers. Instead, they must have a balance of good drivers and risky drivers. It is easier for an insurance company to supply coverage to a teen if there is another, less risky driver also on the plan.

Con: Expense

If you do succeed in finding a carrier to provide your car insurance, you should be aware of high costs. As a rule, car insurance companies raise costs and keep them high for any driver under the age of 25. Aside from this factor, you will be missing out on the advantages of grouping. Your parents are aware that paying for two cars to be insured on one plan is cheaper than paying for two plans. You will miss this benefit entirely, and you will end up paying substantially more to be on your own plan than you would simply reimbursing your parents.

Pro: Build Your Credit

One positive result of having your own car insurance at a young age is the ability to establish a payment history for yourself. Paying to insure your own car is a big financial step. It is something many individuals do not do until several years later in life. Starting early can help you build your credibility so you will be eligible for other opportunities at a young age. For example, you may find that you can obtain lower renter's insurance costs if you have been paying your own car insurance for years.

Pro: Reduce Future Costs

When you are on your parents' plan, your parents will benefit from your good driving record. The account as a whole will maintain a positive balance. After that, when you do eventually obtain your own insurance, you will still have no payment record and no history of credits versus debits to an insurance account. On the contrary, if you start young with your own insurance, you will establish a record early. You can then benefit from car insurance savings later in life that may at least partly offset the expense you took on as a teen.

How can I get my own auto insurance as a teenager?

If you wish to obtain your own auto insurance policy as a teenager, you will have to shop around for insurance companies willing to extend you a policy. Teen drivers are the costliest to insure, and many insurance companies would prefer to keep you on a plan with your parents. Research auto insurers that offer specific lines for new drivers. You can still expect to pay more than you would if you shared a plan with your parents. However, you can ask for discounts if you own your vehicle in your name, have a job or routinely get good grades in school.

Why is car insurance for teenagers so expensive?

Car insurance for teenagers is the most expensive type of auto insurance to secure. The expense comes from the fact that teen drivers make more claims than other groups of people. Insurance companies must charge more based on these statistics. The high charges are intended to make sure that the insurance company can afford anticipated claims from a teen driver. In order to reduce your insurance costs as a teen, stay on your parents' plans, look for good student discounts and take a safe driver class. Many insurance companies offer large discounts to teens who have gone to driving schools prior to getting their licenses.

Are there any ways to get cheap car insurance for teenagers?

There is no real option for cheap car insurance for teenagers. However, there are some discounts you may be able to take advantage of. First, it is best to group a teen driver's plan with his or her parents' plan. Then, ask about good student discounts. Most insurance companies will provide at least a small discount for students getting good grades in school since these individuals are likely to be safer drivers. Be sure to have a teenager take a safe or defensive driving class prior to getting a license. Turn in forms from these classes, such as those offered at the Department of Motor Vehicles, for a discount.

What is good student car insurance?

Good student car insurance offers a discount to teen drivers with good grades. Many insurance companies offer this discount. The driver simply submits copies of school records or report cards in order to receive the benefit. Insurance companies use demographic research to determine how much they should charge. They have discovered that students with good grades tend to have fewer claims than those not performing well in school. As a result, they reward those students with good grades with lower rates. The insurance system as a whole operates with this type of reward system. For example, individuals who are married or have children may also be eligible for discounts.
A structured settlement is an agreement for periodic payments from an insurance company. For example, you file a lawsuit against a grocery store where you have a slip and fall. The grocery store is held liable for your injuries, but it has an insurance policy to cover the claim. As a result, you will enter into an agreement with the insurance company to resolve the payments.

Benefits

The main benefit of a structured settlement is financial management. On your end, it is easier to plan your finances when a payment is spread out over a length of time rather than paid out all at once. It may also be beneficial for your tax liabilities.

Problems

If you are financially savvy, you may feel you can invest the money in your settlement and turn a profit rather than waiting to receive the money for years on end. In this case, it may be better to receive the lump sum payment, even if it is slightly lower than the structured settlement. The exact details will have to be arranged with the payer.

Advantages of a Structured Settlement

An insurance company may offer you a structured settlement if you win a claim. You will not receive an immediate check for the money you are owed. Instead, you will receive this money through periodic payments. Depending on the terms of your settlement, you will receive different amount of money. A structured settlement has many advantages over a lump sum payment.

You will usually receive more money by accepting a payment plan.

Financial planning, including tax planning, can be easier with the help of a structured settlement.

Add additional income to your salary each year, rather than receiving a bulk check.

You can slowly account for the additional income over time with a structured settlement, making better use of the funds.

Structured settlements may have certain tax advantages over other forms of income making them affordable.

If you are unsure how to invest your money, or are not good at budgeting, a structured settlement can offer significant protection.

Possible Disadvantages of Structured Settlements

You may think structured settlements are just a different way to receive the money a financial institution owes you. However, a structured settlement rarely pays dollar for dollar what a lump sum pays. Commissions, fees, and inflation can all affect the sum you actually receive in the end. Further, since the money is held by another institution until it is paid to you, you cannot use it for any major purchase or investment. Most financial advisers believe, even conservatively invested, the money in a structured settlement will be worth far more through early investment than it can be worth through periodic payments over time.

Can you garnish or lien structured settlement payments?

Structured settlement payments can be used as income to the recipient. In a situation where wage garnishment is possible, it is also possible to garnish structured settlements. For example, if you are a borrower who has defaulted on a home loan, the lender may sue to to receive the payments you owe. Even if you have lost your job or receive no other income, if the lender finds out you have a structured settlement in your name, they can ask a judge to garnish the wages you receive from the settlement.

Selling a Structured Settlement

If you are considering selling a structured settlement, be wary that some offers are too good to be true. Structured settlements are designed to provide you with the many benefits, if you hold on to the plan. In some cases, you may find yourself in the middle of a structured settlement and may need a lump sum.

Deciding to Sell a Settlement

Consider the benefits of selling your structured settlement, the first of which is a lump sum of cash. Ask yourself why you need the money and whether it is it an emergency. Ask yourself if you simply looking for an increase to your income. Ultimately, selling a settlement will always leave you with less cash than if you allowed the settlement to mature. You should only decide to sell if you are in a situation where the immediate benefits will significantly change your financial situation. For example, you may be facing default on a loan or foreclosure on your home. In this case, a sale may be wise.

Following Legal Regulations

Unfortunately, once you decide to sell, you will be caught up in a tricky world of legal regulations. About 60 percent of all US states forbid the selling of structured settlements. If you are allowed to sell, you must do so in the midst of federal regulations. Always ensure you follow all state and federal laws, because you can risk losing your entire benefit.

Entertaining Offers

You do not have to accept the first offer you see. Typically, once you decide to sell, you will find advertisements from companies that specialize in purchasing structured settlements. These companies can survive because they turn a large profit. Instead of going with the first offer, wait to entertain offers from different companies and individuals. You may find that different buyers offer significantly varied offer prices and it will be worth your while to wait for the best offer you can find.

Tax Consequences to You and the Buyer

Structured settlements are designed to help individuals, who are receiving money as the result of injury, to receive the maximum benefits. This means the federal and state government overseeing the payments will allow for certain tax benefits; namely, the sum may be taxed at a lower rate than the other parts of your income annually. Once you sell the settlement, however, you fail to receive these benefits in the future. The buyer of your settlement may also lose the benefits. In fact, your sales income on the settlement may be taxed at a very high rate, further compromising the benefits of the sale. Always speak to a lawyer about the tax consequences before moving forward with a sale. Also, consult a CPA or accountant for important tax consequences as well.

Things to Consider when Entering into a Structured Settlement

Your insurance company may attempt to arrange a structured settlement plan if you win a claim against the company. With this arrangement, the structured settlement will allow periodic payments to you rather than providing you with a lump sum. This may sound like a fair deal, but look out for these problems with structured settlements.

Periodic Purchases

If you would like to make a large purchase during the life of your settlement, you may not have the funds available to do so. For example, you may know your insurance company is currently paying out $200,000 to you in $20,000 annual payments. If you want to buy a house this year, the annual payments do not help as much as the lump sum would. Consider this scenario when setting up your arrangement.

Investment Potential

You may be able to invest the money you receive in a lump sum today, turning the money into a much greater value in the future. If the insurance company holds onto the money, there will be no investment potential. For this reason, it can be in your best interest to take a lump sum settlement even if the figure offered is lower than the total payout would be over time with a structured deal.

Excessive Commissions

Beware of commissions your insurance company, agent or attorney is charging during the process of setting up a structured settlement. It is not uncommon for the agent to charge high fees for paying out a settlement. Check the terms of the settlement contract before agreeing to any commission structure. Make sure that a commission is disclosed.

Overstated Value

Your insurance company may attempt to overstate the value of the payments it is making to you. In doing so, it may be eligible for specific rebates, legal protections or methods to otherwise reduce the actual money it will pay you as part of the settlement. Build your contract to ensure that any financial benefits given to the insurer, as a result of your contract, come directly to you rather than staying in the company's pocket.

Conflict of Interest

Make sure that your attorney has no ties with the insurance company you are filing a claim against. In some cases, attorneys will earn a commission by convincing their clients to accept a structured settlement. It is illegal for an attorney to do this without letting you know. However, it is very difficult to track down and catch the culprits so it happens all the time.

Life Expectancy

Do not accept a structured settlement if you feel you will not be around to see the payments. This is an unfortunate reality if you receive your settlement late in life. It is in your best interest to assure payments are made to you immediately, when you need it most, rather than at a point in your life when you cannot appropriately invest, save or spend the money. Consider your financial needs when you accept a structured plan.
If you do business for a profit, you are eligible for a business owners policy. Business owners policies are available to any individual who is exposed to work hazards, including employment hazards, lawsuit or liability exposures. Depending on the size of your business and where you work, you will be eligible for a specific type of insurance plan. For example, if you are a sole proprietor working from home, you can add a business owners line to your home owners policy. Your business policy will be tax deductible and you will receive basic coverage.

Do You Need a Business Owner's Policy for Your Small Business?

You may not see the immediate need for a business owners policy, but any individual should consider the coverage. This is particularly true if you work from home or have a small personal business. Consider the following:

What would happen if you were sued for a copyright infringement for your website?

What if you were sued for defamation for a critical blog post?

All of these scenarios occur daily. Consider these reasons for obtaining a business owners policy:

Protection from lawsuit

Protection of any property used to supply your business or help you turn a profit

Protection in case you or one of your employees becomes injured or ill on the job

Tax deductions available to you for purchasing the policy or officially incorporating your business

Protection in the case your business is no longer viable and must declare bankruptcy

Ability to market your business as "licensed, insured"

If you do not have a business owners policy, you are personally responsible for the actions of your business. Your business policy can offer protection in the case your business encounters financial issues or other difficulties.

What is business owner's policy (BOP) insurance?

Business owners policy insurance protects you personally if your business is involved in a property or liability claim. For example, a photographer working from home may think they have no insurance needs. However, what would happen if this photographer displays a photo in a portfolio and a subject in that photo did not give permission? The subject could sue the photographer, and in the absence of a business owner policy, the photographer would be responsible for all costs for the lawsuit and any resulting settlement. A business owners policy offers a delineation between the owner and the business.
If your employer offers a group life insurance plan, consider taking advantage of the opportunity. You will receive many benefits, including the following.

#1 Lower Costs

In a group insurance plan, the cost to add one person is much lower than it is for an individual plan. This cost per person continues to go down the larger the plan. For example, the cost of the thirtieth person on a plan will be higher than the cost of the thirty-first. As a result, everyone protected through a large plan benefits from an overall lower cost.

#2 Ease of Contribution

You can easily contribute to a life insurance plan through your monthly or bimonthly paycheck. Just as your medical insurance costs are deducted, your life insurance costs can be directly deposited. Typically, life insurance on a group plan is less than $20 per month. If your survivors ever need the money, it will be well-worth this cost.

#3 Protect Your Dependents

If you have no dependents, the cost of life insurance may not be worth the reward. However, it is important to think about the responsibilities you assume for others in your life before making any life insurance decision. If you would leave survivors in a disadvantaged situation should you no longer be able to provide income, life insurance is a necessary protection.

What will happen to my group life insurance when I retire?

If you are on a group life insurance plan with your employer, you will not continue to receive benefits once you retire. Essentially, life insurance plans through your employer are left behind if they are not needed. You may have the option to continue your coverage through an individual plan. This can be very important when you retire, as the chances that you will need your life insurance policy begin to accelerate. You should compare the cost of this continuation with the cost of individual plans for retirees to determine which is least expensive and which will offer the greatest benefits at this time in your life.

What are the drawbacks of a group life insurance plan?

The main drawback of a group life insurance plan is its rigidity. When your employer or union offers a plan, the group decides on which options it will present you. As a participant, you will typically be choosing from no more than two plans rather than the long list of custom plans most insurance companies offer. If you are not in need of detailed coverage--for example, if you are very young or do not have dependents--a group life insurance plan does not need to be highly customizable. If you have very special needs, however, you may consider paying more for an individual plan.

How does a group life insurance policy differ from individual coverage?

When you participate in a group life insurance policy, you are only one of several or many individuals taking part in your employer's plan. The employer is the actual "insured," and you are a subdivision within this greater policy. As a result, the process the insurance company undergoes for determining the plan's costs and features is different from the process used for individual coverage. Your employer applies based on its revenues, number of employees and industry. Claim history will also be considered. Your individual claim history will not have an effect on the underwriting process. Instead, you simply get a piece of the pie once the employer has made an agreement with the insurance company.

Will my group life insurance policy remain in effect if I am laid off?

If you are laid off from your job, you may lose all insurance benefits including your group life insurance policy. Your employer has no responsibility to ensure that these benefits are continued on your behalf. However, you will be eligible for continuation of benefits through the COBRA system. It is your job to obtain the necessary forms to apply for and secure COBRA. You will have to pay 100 percent of your costs. During your employment, your employer likely split those costs with you. However, you may be qualified for up to a 60 percent reduction through federal programs. When you file your unemployment benefits, ask about this eligibility.

Can I get group life insurance if I have a disability?

It is easier to secure life insurance with a disability through a group plan. With a group plan, your employer is the one applying for coverage. You are eligible for benefits through your employer, and if you have added costs due to your disability, these will be spread throughout the group. As a result, a group life insurance plan is an excellent option for you. However, since the plan is tied to your job, you will lose the plan if you lose your job. In this case, you will have to find extensions through individual plans, which can be harder to secure with a disability.
If you donate funds to a nonprofit organization during a given year, you are eligible for a charitable donation tax deduction on your tax return. In order to receive this deduction, though, you must follow the IRS procedures to file it appropriately. You will claim the deduction on your Form 1040, Schedule A. There is a specific line for you to input your deduction. If you are completing your taxes online, you will be prompted when it is time to enter your deduction.

Charitable Contribution Deduction Rules

You must donate cash or property. If you pledge funds, you do not receive a deduction until you have fulfilled that pledge. For example, pledging $20 a month to your public radio network does not mean you get a deduction of $480 that year. You have to provide information on what you have actually given.

You must be giving the funds to a tax-exempt organization. Tax deductible charity organizations must have 501(c)(3) status.

You must be able to itemize your deductions. If you do not plan on itemizing your deductions this year, then you cannot capitalize on the deductions you have made through charitable contributions.

You have to keep your records. For example, if you have received a charitable donation appraisal on property you donated, you need to have this appraisal on-hand come tax time.

Record Keeping

You must keep written records of all donations to charity, including tax donations. If you are giving a sum larger than $250 on one donation, then you will need supporting documentation in order to receive the benefits. You should even keep records of any cash donations. To ensure your records qualify, keep the following:

The name of the organization - if you have the organization's tax payer identification, keep this as well

The date of your contribution

The amount of your contribution

Property Contributions

If you are not donating money, you may be able to receive a charitable deduction for donation of property. You must be able to prove the market value of the property you donated if you intend on itemizing the deduction. You need the following in this case:

An appraisal form stating the fair market value of your item - If you are not having the item appraised, you may not need this form, but the IRS can question your determined fair market amount if it is unsubstantiated with an appraisal. If your donation is more than $5,000, you need an appraisal or it will not stand up to the scrutiny of the IRS.

IRS Form 8283 is required for a single non-cash contribution of over $500.

If you are donating a vehicle, and the vehicle is worth more than $500, you need a written statement from the organization you donated the vehicle to and an appraisal of value.

Charitable Donation Limits

There is what is called a 50/30/20 deduction limit on all charitable donations. This means the following:

The limit for cash contributions to charity is 50% of your adjusted gross income

The limit for property contributions is 30% of your adjusted gross income

You can deduct contributions of capital gains assets up to 20% of your adjusted gross income.







Can you get tax back for charity work?







You cannot deduct the value of time spent on a project as a charitable donation tax deduction. For example, if you are a carpenter, you may devote a weekend to building for Habitat for Humanity. The time you spend on the project cannot be deducted at your normal hourly rate. However, any out-of-pocket expenses you incur during that period can be deducted. This includes wear and tear on your machinery, nails and supplies, and even lunches or the gas for driving time to and from the location. Any expense made during the time you are working can be deducted if it is directly related to the charity activity or event.







What's the charitable contribution cap on donated autos?







If you donate a vehicle, you are eligible for a charitable donation tax deduction. You cannot deduct more than 50 percent of your taxable income, regardless of the type of donation. There is a standard $500 deduction for the donation of a vehicle. You may be eligible to deduct more if

you provide a statement showing you did not receive a good or service in return

you did receive a service in return and provide a statement showing that service was made up entirely of intangible religious benefits, if that was the case

You can then deduct a value up to the amount the charity sold the vehicle for.
With tax season underway, many people find themselves concerned about their tax bracket. The federal income tax table changes every year and it is important to understand how much of your income is taxable. Taxable income is very different from gross income. Gross income is the sum of all the money you earn in any given year. At the most basic level, taxable income is your gross income minus your standard deductions. The deductions will vary, depending on your filing status. You can file as single, married filing jointly, married filing separately, head of household or a qualified widower. You can also file personal exemptions for your dependents. The Internal Revenue Code is complicated. The best way to get detailed information about your specific tax situation is to consult with a tax professional.

The Tax Table

The federal income tax table reports marginal tax rates on taxable income. Federal taxes are not average tax rates. Every income level, even if it is within a one dollar difference, is taxed at a different average rate. The table below shows the marginal tax rates for 2010 income.

Marginal Tax Rate Filing as Single Filing as Married Filing Jointly or Qualified Widow(er) Filing as Married Filing Separately Filing as Head of Household 10% $0 to $8,375 $0 to $16,750 $0 to $8,375 $0 to $11,950 15% $8,376 to $34,000 $16,751 to $68,000 $8,376 to $34,000 $11,951 to $45,550 25% $34,001 to $82,400 $68,001 to $137,300 $34,001 to $68,650 $45,551 to $117,650 28% $82,401 to $171,850 $137,301 to $209,250 $68,651 to $104,625 $117,651 to $190,550 33% $171,851 to $373,650 $209,251 to $373,650 $104,626 to $186,825 $190,551 to $373,650 35% $373,651 and higher $373,651 and higher $186,826 and higher $373,651 and higher

A Few Examples

Suppose an individual files as single and makes $38,000 in taxable income. Their taxes will be calculated by using:

10 % x $8,375 + 15 percent * ($34,000 - $8,375) + 25 % x ($38,000 - $34,000) = $5,681.2

Since each tax bracket applies only for the level of income listed. This individual falls into the 25 percent tax bracket. The highest marginal tax rate is 25 percent. The average tax rate can be calculated by dividing the taxable income: $5,681.25 / $38,000 = 14.95 percent.

Average tax rates will be lower than marginal tax rates. Because of this, there is no need to try to hit a “target” income level that will have a tax benefit.

Consider another example, in this case we will review the tax rate of a married couple that files jointly with a combined taxable income of $76,000. The couple’s taxes owed are calculated by using:

10 % x $16,750 + 15 % x ($68,000 - $16,750) + 25 %x ($76,000 - $68,000) = $11,362.50.

It is important to remember that a higher tax bracket will only come into effect with the income that falls within that range. In other words, if there is only a $100. difference of the income, only that portion of the income will be taxed in the higher bracket.
Hearing about the possibility of an IRS audit makes many people uncomfortable. The thought of having to justify deductions and tax returns to the IRS is something that no one wants to have to deal with. If you want to avoid being audited, here are some of the top triggers for an IRS audit to watch out for.

1. High Deductions

One of the biggest triggers to an IRS audit is unusually high deductions. This does not necessarily refer to a high dollar amount of deductions but a percentage of deductions compared to your income. For example, if you make $200,000, the IRS will probably not be surprised if you have $40,000 worth of deductions. However, if you only make $60,000, they will throw up a red flag if you deduct $40,000. While there is not a specific percentage of income that they will allow you to deduct, this is just a general rule to be aware of.

2. High Income

If you have a high income, you are also more likely to be audited than someone with a low income. This does not mean that just because you have a high income, you are going to be audited. However, with individuals that have high incomes, there is more opportunity for them to hide income and use questionable deductions. The IRS wants to make sure that they are getting their fair share of your high income.

3. Cash Income

Another common trigger for an IRS audit is if you have cash income. For example, if you are a waiter or you work at a casino, there is a good chance that you are going to be bringing in a substantial amount of your income in the form of cash. Because of this, the IRS knows that there is a greater likelihood that you are not reporting all of the income that you bring in. In order to avoid any problems, you want to make sure that you keep detailed records of every dollar that you receive in the form of cash. This way, you will be able to easily provide records to the IRS if you are audited and avoid paying extra taxes.

4. Self-Employment

If you are self-employed, the odds of getting audited increase exponentially. As a self-employed individual, there are multiple ways for you to hide your income and take extra deductions. Because of this, the IRS pays very close attention to individuals that file their taxes as a self-employed person. For example, if you claim a very large home office deduction, the IRS might want to check it out to make sure that it is legitimate. You will also want to make sure you keep receipts for any business expenses that you plan on deducting.

5. Income Discrepancies

If there are any discrepancies between the income statements that the IRS receives from your employers and from what you report on your taxes, this is a sure way to get audited. You need to report the accurate amounts of income that you bring in.

If you take the earned income credit, are you more likely to be audited?

The earned income credit is a tax credit offered by the United States government to help low-income families. If you take this credit, there is a higher likelihood that you will be audited by the IRS. The reason behind this is that there have been a number of fraudulent claims recently with this particular credit. Many people know that you can get more money with this credit if you say that you have a larger household than you actually do. This leads some people to claim children that are not theirs and increase the tax refund.

Will early withdrawal on a retirement account trigger an IRS audit?

In most cases, the fact that you take money out of a retirement account early will not necessarily trigger IRS audit proceedings. However, when you take money out of your retirement account early, this could make your annual income much higher than it was in the past. When you have high income, you are more likely to trigger an audit than if you had a lower income. The IRS looks for large discrepancies between your current annual income and your annual incomes of the past. If your income is much higher this year, the IRS will be more likely to take a look at your situation.
As 2010 nears its end, many Americans are beginning to think about year-end tax planning. This carried with it a great deal of uncertainty throughout November 2010, as Bush-era tax cuts were a hot issue in Congress. As of December 7, 2010, however, President Barack Obama announced a deal that would extend all Bush-era tax cuts. This deal assured that Americans, including wealthy Americans, would not see any unexpected rise in taxes in the year-end filing process. It also, however, announced pending changes in other areas of tax law, including estate tax and Social Security.

Extension of Tax Cuts

Bush-era tax cuts represent a decrease of approximately 3 percent for each individual filing. This tax break was enforced unilaterally, despite income. Initially, Democrats wanted to remove this break for individuals earning more than $200,000 ($250,000 for joint filers) as of January 1. However, with the breaks extended, all Americans will still receive the break benefit.

In addition to extending the cuts, the new tax program will extend unemployment benefits through 2011 for individuals currently facing an end to this government insurance program. The need for long-term unemployment insurance, according to President Obama, is the main reason Democrats were willing to compromise on other tax break issues. For example, the legislation will not extend the "Making Work Pay" benefit that was introduced in the stimulus bill. This means you cannot count on a $400 refund if your income is under $75,000. Instead, the legislation does include a 2 percent payroll tax holiday. This means individual tax payers will see about a 30 percent reduction in the total figure they must contribute to payroll tax on each paycheck.

Individual Tax Credits

You will be able to declare tax breaks and credits for energy efficiency improvements to your home or vehicle throughout 2010. These credits include improvements to make your home more energy efficient, credits for purchasing hybrid vehicles between 2006 and December 2010, credits for purchasing plug-in vehicles or hybrid vehicle conversion options. The amount of the credit varies based on your cost basis. The marriage tax refund will still be available. This means that if you are married filing jointly and this results in a higher tax bracket for one member of the couple--what is called the "marriage penalty"--you may be eligible for a refund. Further, the extension of cuts exempts estates valued at $5 million for singles and $10 million for couples from the standard 35 percent estate tax.

Planning Considerations

As you approach your year-end tax planning, it is critical to take a long look at how the legislation will affect individuals, retirement funds, estates and small businesses. Since tax cuts have been extended, you may find you are eligible for critical savings you were not expecting. However, the date when your qualifying events occurred will be critical in determining if you are eligible. For example, the date you purchased a hybrid, the date you were married, the date you hired a new employee, and other such factors will affect whether you can file for credits and tax cuts. For this reason, it is important to keep sales documents and certificates to be entered into your tax filing.

Year-End Tax Planning for Individuals

Year end tax planning can become complicated based on the number and types of income you have over the course of the year. Individuals earning no more than $200,000 (no more than $250,000 for married filing jointly) will see your Bush-era tax cuts extended through 2011. This means you are still eligible for a 3 percent reduction in your income tax, and you may also find key credits thanks to stimulus bill incentives. Applying these incentives at the right time can lead to a much lower tax liability in the future.

Energy Efficiency Tax Credit

You may be eligible for an energy tax credit up to 30 percent or $1,500, whichever is lower, for improvements to your home designed to increase its energy efficiency. The changes must fall into the energy efficient tax credit legislation introduced in the stimulus bill, but if so you will still be eligible for the credit in the coming tax season. You may also receive credits for purchasing a hybrid vehicle prior to December 30, for purchasing a plug-in vehicle or converting your current car to an electric vehicle. The credit you receive is based on your personal cost.

Retirement Plan Deductions

If you contribute to a tax deductible retirement plan, such as a 401k or IRA, you will still receive the same deductions in the coming year. Married individuals filing jointly can deduct up to $10,000 in contributions to an IRA if they are younger than 50 and up to $12,000 if they are between 50 and 60. The maximum deductible contribution to a 401k is $16,500 for 2010. If you earn more than $200,000 as a couple, your modified adjusted gross income will be phased out for catch-up contributions.

College Saving Plan Deductions

If you contribute to a 529 college savings plan for your children or a Coverdell account, you can deduct a portion of contributions. For a 529 plan, the maximum amount you can put into the account is between $100,000 and $350,000 depending on your state of residence. This drops to a much lower $2,000 if you elect to use the more flexible Coverdell account.

Estate Tax Reductions

Estate tax will be eliminated for individual estates valued under $5 million and joint estates valued under $10 million. This means the standard 35 percent estate tax will not apply to an inheritance smaller than this amount. This legislation has not yet gone into effect, so it will not change your inheritance if you received an estate in 2010. However, it will certainly affect the way you choose to save for your beneficiaries.

Payroll Tax Holiday

There is no payroll tax holiday for 2010. However, starting in 2011, there will be a 2 percent temporary payroll tax holiday. This may reduce the amount you contribute to taxes on each of your paychecks without compromising your Social Security benefits in the future. This holiday will go into effect unilaterally, so it will not depend on your income level. Regardless, if you earn no more than $200,000, or $250,000 married filing jointly, you should be well-under the limit for "wealthy" Americans whose tax breaks may be threatened if Bush-era cuts do end in the future.

Year End Tax Planning for Retirement Funds

Year end tax planning is a time to get your retirement accounts in line in order to maximize your deductions. Regardless of your income, retirement planning is essential and can result in a much higher income both this year and in the future. Consider these final tips to ensure you are not penalized for your savings behavior and to further assure you are getting the most benefit possible from your account.

Avoid Excess Contributions

It is essential to know your contribution limits annually. Your limits will vary depending on your income, the type of account you are using and the options your employer offers, if any. For the year 2010, maximum contributions to a traditional 401k or IRA were topped at $16,500, and maximum contributions to a Roth IRA were topped at $5,000. These limits go up if you are married filing jointly or over the age of 50. You may also be permitted a certain amount of catch-up contributions from a previous year. However, you cannot exceed these figures without penalty. If you have deposited too much money into your tax deductible or tax deferred account, you should receive a notice from your plan administrator. You have until December 30 to take the money out of the account. Do not rely wholly on your administrator; keep track personally and know your limits.

Assure Funds Are Fully Vested

If you want to get a deduction for funds placed into a deductible account this year, you actually have until April 15 of 2011 to place the funds into the account. This gives you several months of wiggle room after your 2010 income has been earned and vested into your account. You may find you have a little extra income to place into your fund, or you may find your tax liability can be reduced by depositing more. In either case, make sure the funds are fully vested by April to gain the benefits.

Finalize Rollovers

Rollovers to a different type of account can be very beneficial if they are done under the right conditions. For example, you can roll over funds from a traditional account to a Roth account to gain tax benefits in the future. Any rollover must be completed by the Roth IRA deadline of April 15, 2011 to count for the 2010 tax year. You may have increased tax liability when rolling over from a deductible account to a nondeductible account, but this liability applies only in the current year and can save you money in the future.

Meet Required Distribution Deadlines

Once you reach the maximum retirement age of 72-1/2, you must begin taking withdrawals from your retirement account. These withdrawals are called required minimum distributions. You must take the money out of your accounts by December 30, 2010 in order to meet the IRS's deadlines. If you fail to withdraw the money, it will be withdrawn for you at an additional penalty of 6 percent. Avoid this scenario by making a final review of your accounts to leave no account untouched. In some scenarios, if you have two accounts of the same form, you can take the money out of one and have it apply to both. Otherwise, you will need to take money out of each retirement account.

Year-End Tax Planning for Small Businesses

Year-end tax planning for small businesses provides them with opportunities to maximize profit and minimize tax liability in the future. This is particularly critical if your business opened its doors this year, meaning this is the inaugural tax filing and will set the standard for the future. You will have important decisions to make regarding which expenses to capitalize and which to deduct. You will also have to determine how to distribute earnings to shareholders, where applicable, to avoid double taxation in the future.

Capitalizing Assets

As a business owner, you can deduct or capitalize each of your capital assets. In some cases, you will not have a choice in which strategy you pursue; however, in many cases, the choice will be yours. Capitalizing assets is the process of declaring them as a part of the business's capital expenses. They are not deducted in the given year. Instead, the amount of depreciation in the future is deducted each year. For example, if you purchase a large piece of machinery for $50,000 and anticipate it will last you 10 years, it depreciates at a rate of $5,000 per year. You could choose to deduct the $50,000 expense this year, but by capitalizing the asset instead, you can spread out the deductions and potentially recognize a greater deduction overall.

Deducting Assets

If you do choose to deduct an asset, it counts as a dollar-for-dollar deduction against your business's income this year. You can deduct a number of one-time expenses, such as advertising costs, shipping costs and insurance costs. These expenses affect your profitability in this year, and they will not continue to serve you in future years. As a result, deduction is a better method than capitalization. In fact, you are not legally allowed to capitalize an expense that does not fit the narrow definition of a depreciating capital asset.

Special Deduction Consideration in the First Year

New business owners have a unique choice to make in their first year of operation. During this year, all rules about which expenses can be capitalized or deducted go out the window. Every single expense can be deducted. This includes the expense you went to in determining whether to go into business, the loan application process, meetings, and the purchases of start-up equipment for your office. In the future, the types of expenses you can deduct rather than capitalize will be determined for you. In the first year, though, you will set a pace for your tax filings in the future by making the decision on your own.

Distributing Earnings to Shareholders

If you have shareholders, you will have a whole new set of considerations to make in your year-end tax planning. For example, you can choose to accelerate your distribution of accumulated earnings and profits to 2010. Rather than allowing shareholders to consent to dividends, consider paying out cash distributions this year and allowing shareholders to loan the money back to you. This can allow you to avoid double taxation. You may also consider distributing real estate from a C or S corporation to accelerate capital gains. This is also a good time to consider converting to an LLC in a statutory conversion. Taking advantage of liquidation laws would allow you to avoid double taxation in the future.
If you are trying to secure financing for a start up business, you may need to look in a few choice locations.

1. SBA Loans

One of the most popular ways to secure financing is to get an SBA loan. The Small Business Administration is a government agency that guarantees small business loans. These loans are designed to help entrepreneurs get started with minimal out-of-pocket investments. They also have relaxed credit standards and competitive interest rates.

2. Venture Capital

If you have a good idea for business, you may be able to get private investors to provide you with venture capital. They will give you the money that you need, in return for a percentage of ownership in your company. While you may not like the idea of giving a part of your profits, it might be the best route for you to take because the influx of cash is usually good.

3. Peer-to-Peer Lending

There are also several peer-to-peer lending sites that you might want to investigate. These sites allow you to connect with individuals that have excess money to lend. These lenders will bid on your business and provide you with a competitive interest rate.

Can you get a start up business loan with bad credit?

If you are interested in a, you may be worried about a bad credit score preventing you from getting the financing you need. Even though having a good credit score can be helpful to this process, it is not necessarily essential. Typically, there are several loan programs that will work with people who have bad credit. For example, the Small Business Administration has a history of working with individuals who have questionable credit scores. You can also improve your chances of being approved if you have a substantial amount of collateral to offer in exchange for the loan.
A franchise typically starts as a single business. It may be a restaurant, hair salon, fitness center or even an insurance company. The business owner determines that the business is successful enough to open a second location, but he or she does not want to open the location directly. Instead, the owner sells the opportunity to do so to a franchisee.

Many well-known and popular establishments, including but not limited to fast food restaurants, frozen yogurt shops and hardware stores, are part of franchises. Entrepreneurs who would like to own a business but would prefer not to start one from scratch can purchase a franchise directly from the corporate headquarters. They will receive the backing of a large corporate presence, but they will still own their own businesses.

Purchasing a Franchise

To purchase a franchise, the applicant must have sufficient financial resources and business experience. The franchise as a whole will suffer if one location is not up to par or goes out of business. In order to maintain consistency across multiple locations and continue to develop a strong brand, franchise owners are very strict about the regulations and rules for owning and operating one of their franchises.

Can I own more than one franchise?

Whether you can own more than one franchise will depend on the rules of that particular franchise. Typically, most franchises both allow and encourage this type of behavior. It is not uncommon to meet a business owner whose goal is to continually open new locations of a single franchise in districts where he or she determines that there can be a large profit. However, some franchises restrict activity due to their own standards and distinct goals. Read the franchisee materials for a particular corporation to discover if owning multiple franchises will be restricted.

How does a franchise chain start?

A franchise chain typically starts with a single business owner at a single location. Often, the owner has the goal of franchising the business in the future. However, it is also common for the owner to simply desire a profitable business. Once that owner determines that the business model is sound and a second location can be added, the owner will have to determine whether he or she would like to also own that second location or sell the rights to open the location to another person. If he or she decides to franchise, the business model will be solidified so a franchise can be built.

How much does a franchise cost?

The franchise cost of any chain will depend on the predicted profits, the location and the support of the corporation at large. A very profitable franchise, such as a large, well-known hardware store, may cost upwards of several hundreds of thousands of dollars. On the contrary, purchasing a franchise of a small tutoring company with moderate profits may cost only $20,000 to $30,000. The level of support offered at the corporate level will also affect price. For example, an independent insurance office is notoriously very entrepreneurial, meaning that the individual franchise owner has a lot of control. This may be less costly than a chain whose corporation provides more support.

Which states are franchise registration states?

In a franchise registration state, the state must register and approve all franchise documents prior to sale of any franchise. These states include:

California

Hawaii

Illinois

Indiana

Maryland

Michigan

Minnesota

North Dakota

New York

Oregon

Rhode Island

South Dakota

Virginia

Washington

Wisconsin

If you are selling a franchise anywhere in the state, these documents must be registered prior to sale. Previously, the FCC set a national requirement that you disclose your franchise documents to potential franchisees at your initial meeting. This is no longer a requirement. If you are selling a franchise across state boundaries, unique regulations may apply based on the laws of each state. Ensure you have fully researched and complied with these regulations prior to finalizing a sale.

What kinds of businesses can be franchised?

Nearly any type of business can be franchised, but most franchises are retail establishments. For example, coffee shops, yogurt shops, clothing stores, restaurants and hardware stores are commonly franchised. Beyond retail franchises, the International Franchise Association has a list of categories of potential franchise industries such as senior care, energy, truck and ATM businesses. Retail businesses tend to be the easiest business models to copy, which makes them good options for franchising. However, even complicated business models can be replicated effectively. Varying levels of control can be afforded to business owners looking for entrepreneurial opportunities.
What is Cash flow? Cash flow is the common business term used to describe the amount of cash revenue a business, institution or other enterprise takes in versus its expenses. ("Cash" here is understood to include bank deposits, transfers and debits.) Every wise cash management policy should prioritize cash flow. A positive cash flow ratio is considered the essential indicator of any operation's ongoing viability.

More Important than Making a Profit



It's possible for a business to demonstrate profitability on paper without having positive cash flow, as profitability is defined as the difference between the cost of producing something and the price for which it's sold. A company can be profitable and not generate enough cash to cover its operating expenses and debt. While any business can experience a restricted period of time with a negative cash flow, cash flow needs to be consistently positive over the long run for a business to be considered financially healthy. Investors, shareholders, lenders, and even potential employees all have a stake in a company's long term financial stability.

Carefully Monitored

Cash flow is generally analyzed over specific, limited time increments, such as monthly, quarterly (over the course of a year) or yearly. Some businesses manage negative cash flow by requesting a short-term line of credit from the bank to tide them over during cash shortfalls, but this can be difficult to obtain for smaller businesses, particularly during economic downturns.


Money market accounts and CDs are both popular ways to gain interest while keeping your money safe. Both of these are often used in between investments such as purchasing stocks or options. Depending on your current situation, a money market account or a CD could be right for you. Here are a few things to consider about both forms of investment.



Certificates of Deposit (CDs)



A certificate of deposit is commonly available at any one of your local banks. With CDs, you are given specified terms and specified rates of interest when you deposit your money. For example, the bank will tell you how long they are going to keep your money and the exact amount of interest that you can expect to get back. CDs are insured by the FDIC up to $100,000. Therefore, as long as you keep your CD under $100,000, they are a risk-free form of investment. You can get a CD with a time period as short as a few weeks or as long as a few years. You have to match your needs to the term of the CD and buy one accordingly.



These types of investments are great for those that want to maintain their wealth. You are not going to get rich with one of these, but you aren't going to lose your money either. You will receive a better interest rate than you would from a savings account, so it will at least get you something back for your money.



With a CD, you cannot take out your money before the maturity date. If you do, you will usually pay some type of penalty for withdrawing early. Therefore, your money is tied up for a certain period of time. You cannot do anything with it and you give up the opportunity of making other investments along the way. Therefore, you should only use money that you know you are not going to need for a while.



Money Market Accounts



A money market account is kind of like combining a CD with a checking account. You get access to your money whenever you want it and you can still earn some decent interest along the way. With a money market account you can access the funds via a checkbook or even a debit card in some cases. With some money market accounts, you have a maximum number of withdrawals per month, so it is not exactly like a checking account.



When you put money into a money market account, the investment company that holds the money uses it to make very safe investments. They buy T-bills from the government, bonds, and CDs to provide a steady stream of interest. It is much like a very safe mutual fund. They take the profit that they make and disburse it to all of the money market account holders.



The great thing about a money market account is that you can still use your funds to invest whenever an opportunity comes along. If you like flexibility, a money market account is superior to a CD.







Are money market checking accounts FDIC-insured?







If money market checking accounts are originated at a bank, they are insured by the FDIC. This means that the FDIC will step in and pay for the money in your account up to $100,000 if the bank goes out of business. However, some people get this type of account confused with another option. Mutual fund companies offer a money market mutual fund that is very similar to a money market account with a bank. If you invest in a money market mutual fund, it is not going to be insured by the FDIC, and your money will be at risk.
The decision to own or rent a condo comes down to two matters: financial feasibility and personal desires. You must prioritize these concerns in order to determine whether renting or buying is a better option.

Financial Considerations

Affordability is the first priority. If you cannot afford to buy a condo, then you must decide to rent the condo. Stretching your budget just to own is very risky, particularly in light of mortgage and housing market uncertainties.

Comparable investments should be considered. If you were to rent and invest an amount equal to a housing down payment, how much growth could you reasonably anticipate? Also consider investing the sum you would spend on homeowner's insurance, taxes and homeowner's association fees. You may actually find, despite many feelings to the contrary, that renting is a more profitable investment option. When home prices are not appreciating, taking money out of real estate and placing it in other markets is a wise choice.

Rentability of the property should be considered. When you own a home, you lose the flexibility to leave if necessary. This can be problematic if you must leave at a time when selling is a bad option. As long as you believe you could rent the property to cover at least the majority of your mortgage, you may decide buying is a wise financial decision. If you are in a market without renters, this can be highly risky.

Personal Considerations

Consider how long you can reasonably anticipate staying in the property. Barring any unforeseen circumstances, could you stay for five years? How about ten? Look at your long-term personal goals and see if home ownership fits in at this time.

What personal benefits will you gain from owning a property? Are you someone who takes pride in ownership and would like to make property improvements? Or are you someone who generally allows properties to deteriorate? If you are the latter, home ownership may both a bad personal and a bad financial decision. Taking good care of and improving your home is one way to increase its value, and this can add to the financial feasibility of home ownership. If, however, you know you lack the time or interest to properly care for what will amount to a large responsibility, buying can be financially detrimental.

How stable is your employment? If you work in a very unstable job or industry, renting gives you flexibility to modify your living expenses in the case of an emergency. Ownership does not come with this option, and you may be caught in a bad place if your employment changes.

Do you have assets to fall back on? Just because a bank approves you for a mortgage does not mean it does not pose a risk to you. You may find yourself in a situation where your mortgage becomes too costly to maintain. If you had to sell the home at a loss, would you still have a large enough financial backing to continue living your life, or would you face bankruptcy?

What's the difference between a townhouse and a condo?

A townhouse and condo have many similarities because they are both situated in multi-family residential buildings. The key difference, though, is the way they are situated within those buildings. A townhouse is attached to the house next to it by one or more shared walls. A townhouse owner owns the outside of his or her house, including any yard and external areas. However, there are no units above or below the house itself. A condo, on the contrary, may have units surrounding it on all sides. Condos are essentially apartments offered for sale rather than for rent; the owners do not own any property outside of their immediate units.
Condo foreclosure follows the same general process as any mortgage foreclosure. That process can take many years to complete, and it can result in substantial financial loss to both the borrower and the lender.

Step 1: Missed Payments

Your mortgage lender must notify you of their intent to foreclose on your property. You cannot speed up this process, and you cannot instigate a foreclosure on your end. As a result, it is first necessary to miss payments for at least 90 days. During this time frame, you will watch your credit score drop. You may receive attempts to collect from your lender. If you intend to allow the condo to go into foreclosure, you cannot pay when the lender asks.

Step 2: Foreclosure Notice

Once you have failed to respond to lender requests for payment, you will receive notice of the lender's intent to foreclose. Depending on the state where you own your condo, you will have a limited time frame in order to respond to this request. If you do not intend to pay, this is the point where you should hire a lawyer to help you finalize the foreclosure.

Step 3: Foreclosure Proceedings

The lender will begin foreclosure proceedings by assuring the terms of foreclosure according to your mortgage contract have been met. The lender will have to give you appropriate opportunities to respond based on your contract. The lender can only begin foreclosure if the condo has been used to secure the loan; with the vast majority of condo mortgages, this is the case. Finally, the lender will likely contact the homeowner's association in the building where your condo is located to notify the association that a foreclosure will be taking place. This occurs so the HOA is informed of the plans to change ownership of the unit from you to the bank.

Step 4: Auction or Sale

The lender will attempt to recover the money lost by your mortgage default by selling the condo. This can occur at auction or in a private listing. Foreclosure properties are offered for a very low price because the bank wishes to unload the property quickly. Otherwise, the bank will continue to pay high fees to maintain ownership of the unit. Condos in particular may sell for very low prices because there is a good chance there are other units for sale, possibly even bank-owned units, in the same building. For this reason, condo markets are usually some of the hardest hit if a regional foreclosure crisis does occur.

Step 4: Lawsuit to Recover Lost Funds

Once the condo has sold, you are not off the hook. The lender will attempt to collect any loan balance from you. This attempt usually occurs in a lawsuit. If you cannot repay this money, you must declare bankruptcy. If you can repay this money, you will be legally obligated to do so. The only exception happens when the bank forgives the balance. In this case, however, the forgiven amount may be considered income, and you will owe income taxes to the IRS.

Can a condo be foreclosed on for having unpaid fees?

Whether your condo can be foreclosed on depends on the terms of your mortgage with your lender. Only your lender can foreclose; no other organization has lent you money in exchange for your home as collateral. If you have a home equity loan, it is possible for this lender to foreclose. For example, if you owe fees to your lender, and those unpaid fees are grounds for foreclosure based on your mortgage contract, you may suffer foreclosure if you fail to pay. By contrast, if you owe fees to the homeowner's association, the HOA must apply to place a lien on your property. Only then can they proceed with a foreclosure.
Condo ownership is generally thought of as a step to home ownership, and there are many reasons it can financially prepare you for the demands of later owning a home. Generally speaking, condos are less expensive than comparable single-family properties. By owning and maintaining a condo first, you can set yourself up for the next step of owning a single-family home.

#1 Lower Down Payment

First-time home buyers in particular have a challenge when it comes to putting down a down payment. They do not have a previous property sale to supply them with income to do this, and many are young or in the early stages of their careers. As a result, opting for a condo with a low required down payment can make the process more affordable. On the flip side, an older couple looking to downsize or retire will also benefit from a low down payment. The difference between the sales price of a larger home and the money required for down payment can be used as extra spending cash in retirement when many people need it most.

#2 Property Sales Value

The sales value of a condo can be driven upwards due to improvements to and the desirability of the general condo building. As a rule, condos in small buildings are less affected by bubbles and busts in the housing market than are condos in big buildings. However, even condos in large complexes can present great property sales value if there are not many other units for sale at the time you prepare to sell. In this case, you are offering a chance to buy into a building where few opportunities exist. You will be rewarded with a more competitive market and higher prices.

#3 Amenities and Benefits

While you do have to pay homeowners' association fees in order to receive many benefits of condo ownership, these fees represent only a fraction of the cost of your total benefits. For example, if you would like to have a rooftop pool in the middle of Chicago, you may have to pay several millions of dollars. As a member of an HOA in a condo that has this benefit, though, you can enjoy your rooftop pool for only a few hundred dollars a month. Financially, the amenities offered by many buildings are a great bargain to individual homeowners.

#4 Lower Utility and Maintenance Fees

The cost to maintain a small property is much lower than the cost to maintain a large property. Even in a relatively large condo, you are not paying for items such as your roof, windows or driveway. While these costs do come out of your HOA fees, you are again sharing the cost with a number of homeowners. Further, it is less expensive to heat, cool, furnish and clean a condo than a large home. This can represent savings that may later be used to purchase a house. Or in the case of individuals looking to downsize, these savings can be spent on living enhancements.

How can you get a condo construction loan?

If you are looking for a condo construction loan, you will need to find lenders and programs that extend construction loans for multi-family residential properties. These loans are often considered business loans instead of mortgages. State and federal government programs will often limit their construction loan programs to facilities with four or fewer units. As a result, you will need to approach private lenders alone to secure most condo construction loans. Due to the size of the debt needed to build a large property, you will likely need a very high income, a good business plan, an excellent credit score and a substantial amount of personal capital to place as collateral.
Before you buy a condo, consider the financial costs added to the sales price through maintenance and other issues. While condos often appear to be cheaper than townhouses or single-family properties, the hidden costs can actually make the price of owning a condo higher than the price of owning comparable single-family properties.

#1 Condo Association Fees

The first consideration is the association fee required by a condo or homeowner's association. In many areas of the country, these fees can be moderate, such as a few hundred dollars each month. If you are purchasing a condo in a highly desirable area, though, the condo association fees can be prohibitive. It is not uncommon to find fees that represent 50 percent of your total mortgage cost along coastal areas or in the hearts of cities. Since you do not own any space other than what is inside your condo, these fees can often be wasted on improvements that do not raise the value of your property.

#2 Private Mortgage Insurance

If you buy a condo with less than a 20 percent down payment, you will be required to pay private mortgage insurance (PMI). Some mortgage companies will make this requirement on even higher down payments. Surprisingly, it can be hard to secure private mortgage insurance for some condominium purchases. This occurs because the value of a condo is highly variable based on the value of the building and comparable sales within the building at the time of sale. Since these factors can be unpredictable, many insurance companies refuse to insure condo mortgages. Having a mortgage without PMI may not be an option; where it is possible, it is expensive.

#3 Homeowner's Insurance

A condo is defined as a property with more than two shared walls. In a condo, you may have residents above or below you. You do not own public spaces around your condo, and this leaves them open to other residents of your building or even those passing through. As a result, condos are viewed as less secure than comparable townhouses or houses. Your homeowner's insurance will increase based on the safety rating of your condo. Further, if there is a claim anywhere in your building, you may see your personal homeowner's insurance rates go up as a result. This does not occur as directly in a neighborhood as it does in a multi-family complex.

#4 Resale Value

At the time you sell your condo, the sales price will be heavily dependent on the desirability of the building as a whole. Even a very desirable building will suffer if too many units are for sale at the same time. In this case, supply will be greater than demand, and the sales price of your unit will decrease. This is particularly true if the various units in your building are extremely similar. In this case, it is very difficult to differentiate your listing in a competitive market. Further, even if you make improvements to your property, you must always be vigilant about out-pricing the building. There is a price ceiling on most condo sales.

Are condo assessments tax deductible?

The fee you pay for condo assessments, also known as condo association dues, is not tax deductible. However, if you rent the property out as an investment, the assessment becomes an investment expense that may be deducted. When you are looking for tax deductions in home ownership, remember that you can deduct the interest on your condo mortgage. You can also deduct fees paid for private mortgage insurance, homeowner's insurance and other expenses related to managing the property. Condo ownership can be costly due to the assessment fees charged by the building, and failure to pay these fees may even result in an eviction.
