The adverse effects of climate change and environmental degradation are increasingly driving human mobility the world over, particularly in countries with high exposure and low adaptive capacity. While most climate-related mobility currently occurs within countries, desperation and deteriorating environments can also compel people to seek a livelihood elsewhere through irregular migration. While climate change negatively impacts everyone, everywhere, those already in vulnerable situations due to geography, poverty, gender, age, disability, origin or other status, including migrant women who depend on climate-sensitive livelihoods, and children who are less able to survive extreme weather events, are at the greatest risk of suffering harm. It is imperative to recognize this reality and take meaningful action to protect the human rights of those most affected by climate change, including migrants.

On the occasion of the 27th Conference of the Parties of the UNFCCC (COP27), the United Nations Network on Migration calls on Member States to recognize the opportunities to work towards sustainable, rights-based mitigation and adaptation to climate change in order to address human mobility(1) in this context in line with the recommendations of the UNFCCC Taskforce on Displacement.

The Network urges States, working in cooperation with relevant UN entities and all partners, to address and seek inclusive solutions for the most affected people, including those staying in place, moving internally, and migrating internationally, while fully recognizing the adaptation role that migration plays in this context. While progress has already been achieved in mainstreaming migration into adaptation strategies and policies for climate action, much more needs to be done. As acknowledged at COP26, inadequacies in anticipating and planning for situations that could induce climate-related mobility remain and efforts to mitigate and adapt to the adverse effects of climate change, including through resource mobilization, are insufficient.

The Network encourages States to include pathways for regular migration in their climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies, which enable labour mobility and decent work, human rights and humanitarian admission and stay, family reunification, education, private sponsorships, and visa waivers, to support communities in building resilience to climate change and adapting through mobility. In this regard, improvements have been made in the conclusion of bilateral and regional labour migration agreements or the creation of special visa categories to enable people affected by climate change to move regularly or to remain in countries of destination.

Pursuant to the commitments made in the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration (GCM) and renewed in the Progress Declaration of the first International Migration Review Forum in New York in May 2022, the Network reiterates its call for States to develop inclusive climate change and migration policies and action plans that ensure migrants’ full and effective participation as rights holders. The Network also reminds States that any policy measure or legislation that governs or directly impacts human mobility in the context of climate change should uphold human rights obligations.

States can ensure that this objective is effectively achieved through recognizing that the Paris Agreement, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the Global Compacts for Migration and Refugees are interlinked and should be implemented simultaneously and in a mutually reinforcing manner.

To uphold human rights, strengthen the adaptive capacities of migrants and harness the potential of climate mobility the Network calls on governments, in collaboration with one another and all relevant stakeholders, to:

Strengthen support to countries and people affected by effectively mobilizing adequate finance to support climate action, including through investing in early warning systems and preparedness, and addressing the impacts of both economic and non-economic loss and damage, including for migrants;

Facilitate a just transition to environmentally sustainable, green economies and societies, including by building climate-resilient health systems, promoting resilience and equitable development and advancing social justice and decent work creation, tapping into the skills and experiences of migrants, with the support of business, employers, trade unions and workers organizations, and harnessing their contributions towards sustainable development;

Enhance and diversify the availability of climate-sensitive pathways for regular migration, including by creating regular pathways for labour mobility, ensuring they are accessible to all, including women and children as an adaptation option and a way to prevent and address situations of vulnerability;

Enhance regional and international action and cooperation to effectively address climate-related migration at local, national, regional and global levels through dedicated and coordinated climate change and migration policies and action plans, including by working coherently across all relevant multilateral fora; and,

Foster evidence-based decisions and disaggregated data which inform cooperation and scaled up climate action.

Our shared future depends on realizing the human right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment for all. The interlinkages between climate change, human rights and migration are clear and the international community can no longer delay taking action to protect the environment, for present and future generations.

Every step taken towards safe, orderly and regular migration would make a step forwards in the context of our changing climate.

(1) Climate change-related human mobility is understood as encompassing migration, displacement and planned relocation as reflected in GCM Objectives 2 (18 j) and 5 (21 h) and agreed under relevant UNFCCC processes such as the Executive Committee of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage and the Task Force on Displacement recommendations.

The United Nations Network on Migration was established to ensure effective, timely and coordinated system-wide support to Member States in their implementation, follow-up and review of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. While the Network’s mandate is focused on migration, States are called to also implement these recommendations to displaced persons, refugees and asylum-seekers as well and to protect the human rights of everyone equally, regardless of status.
Following the declaration of an Ebola outbreak in Uganda on 20 September 2022, the outbreak has now spread to seven districts (Kasanda, Kyegegwa, Bunyangabu and Kagadi districts beyond the original epicenter in Mubende district, and then to Kampala City and Wakiso). The government-led response has activated the Incident Management System in order to control the outbreak. In support of the Ministry of Health-led efforts, CEPI, Gavi and WHO have outlined a plan to accelerate research during the outbreak, to ensure access to investigational doses, and to facilitate scaling up and access to any subsequent licensed vaccine.

Vaccination is usually one of the response interventions in such an outbreak, however, there are currently no licensed vaccines (or therapeutics) for Ebola disease caused by the Sudan ebolavirus (SUDV), though there are several candidate vaccines which appear to be suitable for evaluation in a clinical trial during this outbreak.

By embedding research at heart of the outbreak response, we can achieve two goals: to evaluate potentially efficacious candidate vaccines, and to potentially contribute to end this outbreak, and protect populations at risk in the future.

The Ministry of Health has designated the Makerere University Lung Institute to conduct vaccine and therapeutics clinical trials. The clinical trial to evaluate candidate vaccines against this ebolavirus is co-sponsored by the Ministry of Health in Uganda and WHO, and involves support from partners. A Principal investigator from Makerere University Lung Institute will lead the vaccine trial.

WHO, CEPI and Gavi are providing support to ensure that sufficient doses of candidate vaccines are available for the trial and beyond. If sufficient doses can be made available, the aim of the vaccine trial would be to establish how effective the candidate vaccines are in diverse populations. The vaccine developers and funders who will make the candidate vaccines available include the University of Oxford and the Serum Institute of India, the Sabin Vaccine Institute and the US government institutions Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) and National Institutes of Health (NIH), as well as International AIDS Vaccine Initiative (IAVI) and MSD.

Moreover, there are other organisations committed to supporting the overall response, including Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), UNICEF, non-governmental organizations, donors, and regulators including the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum (AVAREF).

Goals of the collaboration

The following goals have been identified for the organizations’ efforts; these are likely to evolve in response to the outbreak.

In the short term, supporting the Ministry of Health of Uganda’s outbreak response efforts as needed to control SUDV and, under their leadership, support a randomized clinical trial to evaluate one or more candidate vaccines as part of the response to the outbreak.

In the mid-term, allocating resources to plan for and to reserve sufficient manufacturing capacity to scale up the production of candidate vaccines (even before they are licensed), potentially by establishing a risk-sharing mechanism. This may also involve manufacture of additional vaccines at risk during the trial to ensure that doses of a vaccine found to be efficacious vaccine can be made available to end the outbreak as quickly as possible.

Over the longer term, exploring pathways to ensure that licensed SUDV vaccine(s) are available via the Ebola stockpile, which is enabled and funded by Gavi and managed by UNICEF on behalf of the WHO-coordinated International Coordinating Group (ICG) mechanism on Vaccine Provision, potentially using innovative market shaping mechanisms.

Furthermore, committing to developing a mechanism to ensure equitable access and funding for SUDV vaccines research, outbreak response and preventive vaccination. Also, to provide support for development and evaluation of next generation vaccines.

The signatories commit to be guided by the following principles:

Leverage organisational strengths towards a common goal: Considering each institutions’ mandate and mission and its expertise, all pledged to increase coordination and support the overarching agreed goals which cut across the remit of any one institution

Considering each institutions’ mandate and mission and its expertise, all pledged to increase coordination and support the overarching agreed goals which cut across the remit of any one institution Country driven and country engaged : Commit to support the Ministries of Health experiencing the outbreaks and ensure any engagement with the countries is coordinated and aligned with the Ministry of Health and responds to locally identified needs

: Commit to support the Ministries of Health experiencing the outbreaks and ensure any engagement with the countries is coordinated and aligned with the Ministry of Health and responds to locally identified needs Decision making which is evidence-informed and considers access : Commit to ensure decision making builds on robust scientific assessment of candidate vaccines and considers implications for future equitable access to a licensed vaccine

: Commit to ensure decision making builds on robust scientific assessment of candidate vaccines and considers implications for future equitable access to a licensed vaccine End-to-end approach based on access and equity : Achieve development and delivery goals by accelerating research and development, as well as push and pull mechanisms and other innovative financing – with access and equity centred at each stage

: Achieve development and delivery goals by accelerating research and development, as well as push and pull mechanisms and other innovative financing – with access and equity centred at each stage Efficient resource allocation : Ensure adequate funding and resources are available in a timely manner and aligned with national research and response priorities

: Ensure adequate funding and resources are available in a timely manner and aligned with national research and response priorities Research integrity and ethics: Conduct research integrated in the response to outbreaks and in accordance with Good Clinical Practices.

Global research and development collaboration in response to Ebola outbreaks

The actions taken by the Ministry of Health in Uganda and its partners build on past collaboration and experiences responding to Zaire ebolavirus outbreaks (another Ebola virus species), on COVAX lessons learned, and on working on other vaccine stockpile mechanisms.

A commitment to encourage availability of doses for the candidate vaccines for clinical trial and beyond. In 2014, the Gavi Board approved a funding envelope for accelerated access to Ebola vaccines including eventual procurement of licensed vaccines, vaccine delivery and support for recovery in affected countries. Gavi subsequently signed an Advance Purchase Commitment (APC) agreement with Merck, securing the commitment to achieve and maintain availability of 300,000 doses of investigational vaccine doses until licensure and WHO recommendation.

Integrating clinical research in the outbreak response. Together with the Ministry of Health in Guinea, WHO was part of a broader coalition of countries and partners which worked to assess candidate Ebola vaccines in the context of the West Africa Ebola outbreak caused by Zaire ebolavirus species. In 2014, a WHO-led global consortium rapidly initiated the necessary Phase 1 trials (VEBCON) and a randomized Phase 3 clinical trial in Guinea led by the Ministry of Health and WHO with several other partners which generated the evidence on the efficacy of the rVSV- ZEBOV Ebola vaccine. Additional clinical trials to evaluate various vaccines were conducted in 2015 by the Ministries of Health of Liberia and Sierra Leone and with the support of the US National Institutes of Health, The US Centers for Disease Control and the London School of Hygiene and Public Health among others. The experience of the West Africa Ebola outbreak catalysed the establishment of the WHO R&D Blueprint for epidemics by the World Health Assembly in 2015 after CEPI in 2016.

Deploying vaccines with proven efficacy yet unlicensed as part of the outbreak response. After 2015 and before its licensure, the proven effective yet unlicensed vaccine was successfully deployed as part of the response to Ebola outbreaks until 2021 under the leadership of the Ministries of health and with support from WHO, Gavi, UNICEF and other partners. In all the outbreaks since 2016 Ministries of Health, WHO, and several partners have also collected additional evidence on the efficacy of the rVSV-ZEBOV Ebola vaccine. Despite the challenges, during the 2018-2020 outbreaks in Equateur, North Kivu and Ituri provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, over 320,000 people at risk of Ebola (contacts, contacts of contacts, and health care and front-line workers in affected areas) received a safe and effective vaccine.

Creating a mechanism to ensure availability and access to licensed vaccines. In 2019, the Gavi Board approved funding for the establishment of a global stockpile of licensed Ebola vaccines, administered via the ICG mechanism – initially with investigational doses and then licensed vaccine for Ebola Zaire – but with potential to include other vaccines, depending vaccine availability and following WHO recommendations. Stockpile of licensed doses have since been used to combat recent smaller outbreaks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Guinea.

A global, end-to-end collaboration to promote equitable access in support of countries’ strategies and needs. Beyond Ebola, the lessons from the COVID-19 response, including the establishment of the Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator and key learnings from the vaccine pillar COVAX, are particularly important for the field of vaccine R&D, manufacturing, delivery and country and community engagement.

Notes to editors



About CEPI

CEPI is an innovative partnership between public, private, philanthropic, and civil organizations, launched in 2017, to develop vaccines against future epidemics. Its mission is to accelerate the development of vaccines and other biologic countermeasures against epidemic and pandemic threats so they can be accessible to all people in need. Prior to COVID-19, CEPI’s work focused on developing vaccines against Ebola virus, Lassa virus, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus, Nipah virus, Rift Valley Fever virus and Chikungunya virus – it has over 20 vaccine candidates against these pathogens in development. CEPI has also invested in new platform technologies for rapid vaccine development against unknown pathogens (Disease X).

CEPI has played a central role in the global response to COVID-19, supporting the development of the world’s largest portfolio of vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 and its variants with a focus on speed, scale and access, as well as co-leading COVAX, the global initiative to deliver fair and equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines. CEPI is also the world’s leading funder of R&D for broadly protective coronavirus vaccines which could protect against future variants of COVID-19 as well as other coronaviruses with epidemic and pandemic potential.

CEPI has embarked upon an ambitious US$3.5bn five-year plan – called CEPI 2.0 - to dramatically reduce or even eliminate the future risk of pandemics and epidemics. Central to the plan is CEPI’s goal – supported by the G7 and G20 - to compress the time taken to develop safe, effective, globally accessible vaccines against new threats to just 100 days. Achieving this ‘100 Days Mission’ would give the world a fighting chance of containing a future outbreak before it spreads to become a global pandemic. Read the plan at endpandemics.cepi.net/



About Gavi

Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance is a public-private partnership that helps vaccinate half the world’s children against some of the world’s deadliest diseases. Since its inception in 2000, Gavi has helped to immunise a whole generation – over 981 million children – and prevented more than 16.2 million future deaths, helping to halve child mortality in 73 lower-income countries. Gavi also plays a key role in improving global health security by supporting health systems as well as funding global stockpiles for Ebola, cholera, meningococcal and yellow fever vaccines. After two decades of progress, Gavi is now focused on protecting the next generation, above all the zero-dose children who have not received even a single vaccine shot. The Vaccine Alliance employs innovative finance and the latest technology – from drones to biometrics – to save millions more lives, prevent outbreaks before they can spread and help countries on the road to self-sufficiency.

Gavi is a co-convener of COVAX, the vaccines pillar of the Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator, together with the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), the World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF. In its role, Gavi is focused on procurement and delivery for COVAX: coordinating the design, implementation and administration of the COVAX Facility and the Gavi COVAX AMC and working with its Alliance partners UNICEF and WHO, along with governments, on country readiness and delivery.

The Vaccine Alliance brings together developing country and donor governments, the World Health Organization, UNICEF, the World Bank, the vaccine industry, technical agencies, civil society, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and other private sector partners. View the full list of donor governments and other leading organisations that fund Gavi’s work here. Learn more at www.gavi.org and connect with us on Facebook and Twitter.

About WHO

Dedicated to the well-being of all people and guided by science, the World Health Organization leads and champions global efforts to give everyone, everywhere an equal chance at a safe and healthy life. We are the UN agency for health that connects nations, partners and people on the front lines in 150+ locations – leading the world’s response to health emergencies, preventing disease, addressing the root causes of health issues and expanding access to medicines and health care. Our mission is to promote health, keep the world safe and serve the vulnerable.
The thirty-third meeting of the Emergency Committee under the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR) on the international spread of poliovirus was convened by the WHO Director-General on 12 October 2022 with committee members and advisers attending via video conference, supported by the WHO Secretariat. The Emergency Committee reviewed the data on wild poliovirus (WPV1) and circulating vaccine derived polioviruses (cVDPV) in the context of global eradication of WPV and cessation of outbreaks of cVDPV2 by end of 2023. Technical updates were received about the situation in the following countries and territories: Afghanistan, Algeria, Malawi, Mozambique, Pakistan, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Yemen.

Wild poliovirus

The committee was concerned that since its last meeting in June 2022, Pakistan has reported twelve WPV1 cases all from southern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province in Pakistan. Nine cases were from the district of North Waziristan, two from Lakki Marwat and one from South Waziristan bringing the total number of cases in 2022 in Pakistan to 20. Furthermore, there have been 31 additional positive environmental samples detected in districts in KP, Punjab, Sindh and Islamabad, bringing the total to 33 (65 isolates detected in 2021). However, no human polio case has been reported outside of southern KP. The committee noted that the key challenges which are driving transmission in southern KP include the complex security situation leading to inadequate campaign quality and missed children, community resistance (eg fake finger-marking without vaccination, refusals due to various reasons, vaccination boycotts), lack of female frontline workers, weak health infrastructure and service delivery, and sub-optimal routine immunization. Another challenge faced in the most recent campaign was the impact of widespread flooding.

The committee noted that although the ongoing WPV1 outbreak in Pakistan led to a risk of spillover into Afghanistan, there is no evidence of cross-border transmission to date in 2022. Two cases have been reported to date in 2022, one in Paktika province and a second in Kunar province in the East. The polio programme in Afghanistan has gained and sustained access across the country including nearly 3 million children previously inaccessible for almost four years. There remain approximately half a million missed children mostly in the southern region, due to the continued implementation of the mosque to mosque campaign modality. There are also clusters of refusals mainly in the South-East and East regions. Pockets of insecurity pose a threat to polio workers noting that eight vaccinators were killed on 24 February 2022 during a campaign.

The committee was very concerned about continued WPV1 transmission in the Tête province of northern Mozambique. Genetic sequencing confirms that all the viruses are related indicating the outbreak is due to international spread through a single importation event. While the quality of the rounds in the multi-country immunization response is improving, coverage has been insufficient to halt transmission. Furthermore, while synchronization of activities has been agreed upon by all countries involved in the response, it has yet to be implemented in practice. Zimbabwe has yet to conduct any immunization response although it shares a border with the outbreak zone in Tête. Surveillance activities have also been insufficiently coordinated across borders, with Mozambican citizens coming to Malawi for medical care for acute flaccid paralysis and being notified in Malawi rather than Mozambique. Surveillance in Mozambique relies on case finding during campaigns with a lack of active surveillance between campaigns. Other challenges include multiple emergencies, frontline worker fatigue and and high population movement within the subregion.

The committee noted with concern that several frontline health workers were killed in Afghanistan in February 2022, and commended the dedication of health care workers in all countries who are responding to these outbreaks.

Circulating vaccine derived poliovirus (cVDPV)

Northern Yemen, eastern Democratic Republic of Congo and northern Nigeria continue to account for more than 85% of the global cVDPV2 caseload. There have been four new countries reporting cVDPV2 - Algeria, Israel, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America. The viruses detected in the latter three countries are genetically linked indicating long-distance international spread through air travel has occurred. In the USA, there has been a single cVDPV2 case whilst in Israel and the United Kingdom positive environmental isolates have been detected. The US case belongs to a community that has a low level of immunization coverage. Local transmission in these IPV only using countries represents a new risk and the committee noted that this phenomenon should remind all countries that until polio is eradicated, pockets of un- or under-immunized persons pose a risk of polio outbreaks, even in countries that have not reported indigenous transmission for a long time. The virus in Algeria is genetically linked to viruses circulating in Nigeria and is therefore an importation due to international spread. Furthermore, the detection of cVDPV2 in Benin, as has been seen in Ghana, Togo and Côte d’Ivoire appears to have resulted from reinfection caused by new international spread from Nigeria.

Three new countries have reported cVDPV1 - Democratic Republic of the Congo, Malawi and Mozambique.

The committee noted that much of the risk for cVDPV outbreaks can be linked to a combination of inaccessibility, insecurity, a high concentration of zero dose children and population displacement. These have been most clearly evidenced in northern Yemen, northern Nigeria, south central Somalia and eastern DRC. Despite the ongoing decline in the number of cases and lineages circulating, the recent episodes of international spread of cVDPV2 indicates the risk remains high.

The committee noted that the roll out of wider use of novel OPV2 continues under EUL. The committee also noted the delays to timely, quality outbreak response with countries delaying response with the immediately available vaccine until novel OPV2 vaccine became available. The committee noted the SAGE recommendation that timely outbreak response is of paramount importance and countries should use immediately available vaccines and avoid any delays that may occur while waiting for supply of novel OPV2 vaccine.

Conclusion

Although encouraged by the reported progress, the Committee unanimously agreed that the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) and recommended the extension of Temporary Recommendations for a further three months. The Committee recognizes the concerns regarding the lengthy duration of the polio PHEIC and the importance of exploring alternative IHR measures in the future but concluded that there are still significant risks as exemplified by the importation and continued transmission of virus in Malawi and Mozambique. The Committee considered the following factors in reaching this conclusion:

Ongoing risk of WPV1 international spread:

Based on the following factors, the risk of international spread of WPV1 remains:

the current outbreak of WPV1 in Pakistan where there have been 20 cases in 2022 with spread outside the source of the outbreak but within Pakistan

where there have been 20 cases in 2022 with spread outside the source of the outbreak but within Pakistan high-risk mobile populations in Pakistan represent a specific risk of international spread to Afghanistan in particular

represent a specific risk of international spread to Afghanistan in particular the large pool of unvaccinated ‘zero dose’ children in southern Afghanistan constitutes a major risk of WPV1 re-introduction;

constitutes a major risk of WPV1 re-introduction; the importation of WPV1 from Pakistan into Malawi and Mozambique, noting that the exact route the virus took remains unknown;

from Pakistan into Malawi and Mozambique, noting that the exact route the virus took remains unknown; sub-optimal immunization coverage achieved during recent campaigns in southeastern Africa, meaning ongoing transmission may be occurring;



achieved during recent campaigns in southeastern Africa, meaning ongoing transmission may be occurring; surveillance gaps means that such transmission may be missed;

means that such transmission may be missed; pockets of insecurity in the remaining endemic transmission zones.

Ongoing risk of cVDPV2 international spread:

Based on the following factors, the risk of international spread of cVDPV2 appears to remain high:

the explosive outbreak of cVDPV2 in northern Yemen and ongoing high transmission in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern Nigeria, which have caused international spread to neighbouring countries;

and ongoing high transmission in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern Nigeria, which have caused international spread to neighbouring countries; ongoing cross border spread including into newly infected countries such as Algeria, and re-infection of Benin;

including into newly infected countries such as Algeria, and re-infection of Benin; the long distance spread by air travel of cVDPV2 between Israel, the United Kingdom and the USA;

of cVDPV2 between Israel, the United Kingdom and the USA; the ever- widening gap in population intestinal mucosal immunit y in young children since the withdrawal of OPV2 in 2016 and consequently high concentration of zero dose children in certain areas, especially the four areas mentioned above (second dot point)

y in young children since the withdrawal of OPV2 in 2016 and consequently high concentration of zero dose children in certain areas, especially the four areas mentioned above (second dot point) insecurity in those areas that are the source of polio transmission.

Other factors include

Weak routine immunization: Many countries have weak immunization systems that can be further impacted by humanitarian emergencies including conflict and protracted complex emergencies poses a growing risk, leaving populations in these fragile states vulnerable to polio outbreaks.

Lack of access: Inaccessibility continues to be a major risk, particularly in northern Yemen which have sizable populations that have been unreached with polio vaccine for extended periods of more than a year.

Risk categories



The Committee provided the Director-General with the following advice aimed at reducing the risk of international spread of WPV1 and cVDPVs, based on the risk stratification as follows:

States infected with WPV1, cVDPV1 or cVDPV3. States infected with cVDPV2, with or without evidence of local transmission: States no longer infected by WPV1 or cVDPV, but which remain vulnerable to re-infection by WPV or cVDPV.



Criteria to assess States as no longer infected by WPV1 or cVDPV:



Poliovirus Case: 12 months after the onset date of the most recent case PLUS one month to account for case detection, investigation, laboratory testing and reporting period OR when all reported AFP cases with onset within 12 months of last case have been tested for polio and excluded for WPV1 or cVDPV, and environmental or other samples collected within 12 months of the last case have also tested negative, whichever is the longer.

Environmental or other isolation of WPV1 or cVDPV (no poliovirus case): 12 months after collection of the most recent positive environmental or other sample (such as from a healthy child) PLUS one month to account for the laboratory testing and reporting period

These criteria may be varied for the endemic countries, where more rigorous assessment is needed in reference to surveillance gaps.

Once a country meets these criteria as no longer infected, the country will be considered vulnerable for a further 12 months. After this period, the country will no longer be subject to Temporary Recommendations, unless the Committee has concerns based on the final report.

TEMPORARY RECOMMENDATIONS

States infected with WPV1, cVDPV1 or cVDPV3 with potential risk of international spread

WPV1

Afghanistan most recent detection 29 August 2022 Malawi most recent detection 19 November 2021 Mozambique most recent detection 10 August 2022 Pakistan most recent detection 15 September 2022

cVDPV1

Madagascar most recent detection 9 May 2022 Mozambique most recent detection 5 August 2022 Malawi most recent detection 15 August 2022 DR Congo most recent detection 16 August 2022

cVDPV3

Israel most recent detection 24 March 2022

These countries should:

Officially declare, if not already done, at the level of head of state or government, that the interruption of poliovirus transmission is a national public health emergency and implement all required measures to support polio eradication; where such declaration has already been made, this emergency status should be maintained as long as the response is required.

Ensure that all residents and longterm visitors (> four weeks) of all ages, receive a dose of bivalent oral poliovirus vaccine (bOPV) or inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) between four weeks and 12 months prior to international travel.

Ensure that those undertaking urgent travel (within four weeks), who have not received a dose of bOPV or IPV in the previous four weeks to 12 months, receive a dose of polio vaccine at least by the time of departure as this will still provide benefit, particularly for frequent travelers.

Ensure that such travelers are provided with an International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis in the form specified in Annex 6 of the IHR to record their polio vaccination and serve as proof of vaccination.

Restrict at the point of departure the international travel of any resident lacking documentation of appropriate polio vaccination. These recommendations apply to international travelers from all points of departure, irrespective of the means of conveyance (road, air and / or sea).

Further intensify crossborder efforts by significantly improving coordination at the national, regional and local levels to substantially increase vaccination coverage of travelers crossing the border and of high risk crossborder populations. Improved coordination of crossborder efforts should include closer supervision and monitoring of the quality of vaccination at border transit points, as well as tracking of the proportion of travelers that are identified as unvaccinated after they have crossed the border.

Further intensify efforts to increase routine immunization coverage, including sharing coverage data, as high routine immunization coverage is an essential element of the polio eradication strategy, particularly as the world moves closer to eradication.

Maintain these measures until the following criteria have been met: (i) at least six months have passed without new infections and (ii) there is documentation of full application of high quality eradication activities in all infected and high risk areas; in the absence of such documentation these measures should be maintained until the state meets the above assessment criteria for being no longer infected.

Provide to the Director-General a regular report on the implementation of the Temporary Recommendations on international travel.

States infected with cVDPV2, with or without evidence of local transmission:

1. Algeria most recent detection 21 August 2022 2. Benin most recent detection 17 August 2022 3. Burkina Faso most recent detection 28 December 2021 4. Cameroon most recent detection 29 October 2021 5. Central African Republic most recent detection 12 August 2022 6. Chad most recent detection 22 June 2022 7. Côte d’Ivoire most recent detection 18 July 2022 8. Democratic Republic of the Congo most recent detection 20 August 2022 9. Djibouti most recent detection 22 May 2022 10. Egypt most recent detection 29 August 2022 11. Eritrea most recent detection 2 March 2022 12. Ethiopia most recent detection 16 September 2021 13. Gambia most recent detection 9 September 2021 14. Ghana most recent detection 6 September 2022 15. Israel most recent detection 16 June 2022 16. Mauritania most recent detection 15 December 2021 17. Mozambique most recent detection 26 March 2022 18. Niger most recent detection 13 August 2022 19. Nigeria most recent detection 13 August 2022 20. Senegal most recent detection 18 November 2021 21. Somalia most recent detection 21 July 2022 22. Togo most recent detection 22 March 2022 23. Uganda most recent detection 2 November 2021 24. Ukraine most recent detection 24 December 2021 25. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland most recent detection 31 May 2022 26. United States of America most recent detection 20 June 2022 27. Yemen most recent detection 16 August 2022

States that have had an importation of cVDPV2 but without evidence of local transmission should:

Officially declare, if not already done, at the level of head of state or government, that the prevention or interruption of poliovirus transmission is a national public health emergency

Undertake urgent and intensive investigations to determine if there has been local transmission of the imported cVDPV2

Noting the existence of a separate mechanism for responding to type 2 poliovirus infections, consider requesting vaccines from the global mOPV2 stockpile based on the recommendations of the Advisory Group on mOPV2.

Further intensify efforts to increase IPV immunization coverage, including sharing coverage data.

Intensify national and international surveillance regional cooperation and crossborder coordination to enhance surveillance for prompt detection of poliovirus.

States with local transmission of cVDPV2, with risk of international spread should in addition to the above measures:

Encourage residents and longterm visitors to receive a dose of IPV four weeks to 12 months prior to international travel.

Ensure that travelers who receive such vaccination have access to an appropriate document to record their polio vaccination status.

Intensify regional cooperation and crossborder coordination to enhance surveillance for prompt detection of poliovirus, and vaccinate refugees, travelers and crossborder populations, according to the advice of the Advisory Group.

For both sub-categories:

Maintain these measures until the following criteria have been met: (i) at least six months have passed without the detection of circulation of VDPV2 in the country from any source, and (ii) there is documentation of full application of high quality eradication activities in all infected and high risk areas; in the absence of such documentation these measures should be maintained until the state meets the criteria of a ‘state no longer infected’.

At the end of 12 months without evidence of transmission, provide a report to the Director-General on measures taken to implement the Temporary Recommendations.

States no longer infected by WPV1 or cVDPV, but which remain vulnerable to re-infection by WPV or cVDPV

WPV1

none

cVDPV

1. China most recent detection 25 January 2021 2. Congo most recent detection 1 June 2021 3. Guinea most recent detection 11 August 2021 4. Guinea-Bissau most recent detection 26 July 2021 5. Iran (Islamic Republic of) most recent detection 20 February 2021 6. Liberia most recent detection 28 May 2021 7. Kenya most recent detection 13 January 2021 8. Mali most recent detection 23 December 2020 9. Sierra Leone most recent detection 1 June 2021 10. Sudan most recent detection 18 December 2020 11. South Sudan most recent detection 18 April 2021 12. Tajikistan most recent detection 13 August 2021

These countries should:

Urgently strengthen routine immunization to boost population immunity.

Enhance surveillance quality, including considering introducing supplementary methods such as environmental surveillance, to reduce the risk of undetected WPV1 and cVDPV transmission, particularly among high risk mobile and vulnerable populations.

Intensify efforts to ensure vaccination of mobile and cross-­border populations, Internally Displaced Persons, refugees and other vulnerable groups.

Enhance regional cooperation and cross border coordination to ensure prompt detection of WPV1 and cVDPV, and vaccination of high risk population groups.

Maintain these measures with documentation of full application of high-quality surveillance and vaccination activities.

At the end of 12 months without evidence of reintroduction of WPV1 or new emergence and circulation of cVDPV, provide a report to the Director-General on measures taken to implement the Temporary Recommendations.

Additional considerations



The Committee recognizes that border vaccination may not be feasible at very porous borders in Africa but was concerned by the lack of synchronization and cross border coordination in response to the WPV1 importation in southeast Africa. Outbreak response assessments are being carried out currently and urged the countries most directly involved in the response – Malawi and Mozambique - to facilitate these assessments. The committee also noted with concern that most AFP cases were being detected during campaigns and more systematic surveillance efforts are required including training of clinicians to identify and respond to AFP cases.

Noting the acute humanitarian crisis still unfolding in Afghanistan, the committee urged that polio campaigns be integrated with other public health measures wherever possible including malnutrition screening, vitamin A administration and measles vaccination. The committee also strongly encouraged

house to house campaigns be implemented wherever feasible as these campaigns enhance identification and coverage of zero dose and under-immunized children.

In Pakistan, the opportunity to interrupt polio transmission in the coming low season noting that the reported cases are geographically limited to south KP with positive environment isolates detected elsewhere in KP, Punjab and Sindh. The committee urged Pakistan to grasp the upcoming opportunity.

The committee noted the situation in northern Yemen with concern where it is estimated several million children have still not been accessed for immunization. The committee strongly encouraged more urgent dialogue with all relevant stakeholders to enable children to be vaccinated and protected.

The cVDPV2 outbreaks in Jerusalem, London and New York highlight the importance of sensitive polio surveillance, including environmental surveillance, in all areas where there are high risk sub-populations and the committee urges all countries to take heed of the lesson learnt through this event and take steps to improve polio surveillance everywhere that such risks exist.

The committee noted the ongoing work around the duration of the polio PHEIC, and possible amendments to the IHR, and suggested that the committee be kept informed of developments.

Based on the current situation regarding WPV1 and cVDPVs, and the reports provided by affected countries, the Director-General accepted the Committee’s assessment and on 21 October 2022 determined that the poliovirus situation continues to constitute a PHEIC with respect to WPV1 and cVDPV.

The Director-General endorsed the Committee’s recommendations for countries meeting the definition for ‘States infected with WPV1, cVDPV1 or cVDPV3 with potential risk for international spread’, ‘States infected with cVDPV2 with potential risk for international spread’ and for ‘States no longer infected by WPV1 or cVDPV, but which remain vulnerable to re-infection by WPV or cVDPV’ and extended the Temporary Recommendations under the IHR to reduce the risk of the international spread of poliovirus, effective 21 October 2022.




The WHO Director-General transmits the report of the third meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR) Emergency Committee regarding the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox, held on Thursday, 20 October 2022, from 12:00 to 17:00 CEST.

The Emergency Committee acknowledged that some progress has been made in the global response to the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox since the last meeting, including the emerging information on the effectiveness of behavioural interventions and vaccines. The Committee held the consensus view that the event continues to meet the IHR criteria for a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) and highlights the primary reasons for ongoing concern. These include ongoing transmission in some regions, continuing preparedness and response inequity within and between WHO Member States, an emerging potential for greater health impact in vulnerable populations, continuing risk of stigma and discrimination, weak health systems in some developing countries leading to under-reporting, ongoing lack of equitable access to diagnostics, antiviral and vaccines, and research gaps needing to be addressed.

The WHO Director-General expresses his gratitude to the Chair, Members, and Advisors for their advice and concurs with this advice that the event continues to constitute a PHEIC for the reasons detailed in the proceedings of the meeting below. The Director-General issues revised Temporary Recommendations in relation to this PHEIC, which are presented at the end of this document.

Proceedings of the third meeting of the IHR Emergency Committee

The third meeting of the IHR Emergency Committee on the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox was convened by videoconference, with the Chair and Vice-Chair being present in person on the premises of WHO headquarters, Geneva, Switzerland. Members and Advisors joined by videoconference. Eleven of the 15 Members and 6 of the 9 Advisors to the Committee participated in the meeting. The WHO Director-General, in his opening remarks, welcomed the Committee, noting a promising decline in cases globally, although progress in the regions of the Americas and Africa is less certain, where cases are rising in some countries, and underreporting is likely in others.

The Representative of the Office of Legal Counsel reminded the Members and Advisors of their roles and responsibilities and the mandate of the Emergency Committee under the relevant articles of the IHR.

The Ethics Officer from the Department of Compliance, Risk Management, and Ethics also reminded Members and Advisors of their roles and responsibilities, including their duty of confidentiality as to the meeting discussions and the work of the Committee; as well as of their individual responsibility to disclose to WHO, in a timely manner, any interests of a personal, professional, financial, intellectual or commercial nature that may give rise to a perceived or direct conflict of interest. Each Member and Advisor who was present was surveyed. No conflicts of interest were noted.

It was noted that one Member has withdrawn from the Committee on account of other commitments

The meeting was handed over to the Chair of the Emergency Committee, Dr Jean-Marie Okwo-Bele, who introduced the objectives of the meeting: to provide views to the WHO Director-General as to whether the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox continues to constitute a PHEIC, and, if so, to review the proposed temporary recommendations to States Parties.

Presentations

Representatives of Brazil, Ghana, and Sudan updated the Committee on the epidemiological situation in their countries and their current response efforts.

The WHO Secretariat updated the Committee on the global epidemiological situation as well as on the rapidly evolving knowledge in understanding the clinical manifestation and evolution of the disease. Details can be found in the weekly epidemiological update and in the 8th External situation report; WHO updates the information regularly through the external situation reports. All data are also available and case counts are updated daily at this link: 2022 Monkeypox Outbreak: Global Trends (shinyapps.io).

The Secretariat noted that, since the determination of the PHEIC on 23 July 2022, many more countries have promptly responded to the outbreak with a range of public health interventions and cases are declining globally. Nonetheless, the picture is mixed and, overall, the risk assessment conducted by the WHO Secretariat concludes that as of 18 October 2022 the public health risk remains moderate globally; at regional level, risk was assessed as high in the WHO region of the Americas, declining from high to moderate in the European region, remaining moderate for the WHO Regions of Africa, Eastern Mediterranean, and South-East Asia, and remaining low in the Western Pacific Region.

The Secretariat presented its Strategic preparedness, readiness and response plan for monkeypox 2022, and the global funding appeal recently published. With a goal of stopping the global monkeypox outbreak, the plan articulates three objectives: to stop human-to-human transmission, protect the vulnerable, and minimize zoonotic transmission. Five core components underpin the global response: emergency coordination, collaborative surveillance, community protection, safe and scalable care, and countermeasures and research.

After the presentations, Committee Members and Advisors proceeded to engage the Secretariat and the presenting countries in a question-and-answer session.

Deliberative session

The Committee reconvened in a closed meeting to examine the questions in relation to whether the event continues to constitute a PHEIC, and if so, to consider the proposed Temporary Recommendations, drafted by the WHO Secretariat in accordance with IHR provisions.

The Chair reminded the Committee Members and Advisors of the definition of a PHEIC under the IHR: an extraordinary event, which constitutes a public health risk to other States through international spread, and which potentially requires a coordinated international response.

The Committee noted with concern that data from low-income settings are largely lacking, with scanty information available to determine whether transmission observed in Africa is mainly zoonotic or to determine the role of human-to-human transmission, including through intimate or sexual contact. Many low-income settings have inadequate diagnostic capacity and do not yet have access to vaccines or therapeutics, despite clearly having the highest reported case fatality of all regions, and little information is available as to whether authorities are considering their use or requesting supplies.

The Committee noted that in high-income settings in which the outbreak was first experienced, preliminary information suggests significant declines in the number of newly reported cases of monkeypox. Data needed to determine the respective contributions of various factors to these declines have yet to be fully collected and analysed. These factors could include: the adoption of safer sexual behaviours among populations at higher risk; the seasonal reduction of large gatherings enhancing risk-taking sexual behaviours; the strong vaccine acceptance in affected communities and rising rates of pre- and post-exposure vaccination; possibly rising immunity following infection among populations at higher risk; and surveillance artifacts resulting from declining patient presentation and testing for less severe cases. While evaluation and research have established that lower participation in higher-risk activities has contributed to slowing the outbreak, the Committee expressed concerns about the sustainability of these trends, early signals of vaccine hesitancy in a few areas within an overall context of very high vaccine acceptance; and an increasing concentration of cases amongst minoritized communities. The Committee noted the need to gather evidence on the drivers and interventions that have led to positive behaviour change.

The Committee noted the epidemiological concomitance of monkeypox, HIV and other Sexually Transmitted Infections, and expressed concern about the more frequent severe outcomes and deaths in people living with HIV who are immunocompromised and/or not receiving antiretroviral treatment, especially in underserved and low resource settings

The Committee expressed deep concern over continuing and emerging inequities in the response to the outbreak and noted the imperative for mechanisms, commitments and actions that will ensure equity in access to diagnostics, therapeutics, and vaccines. In addition, the Committee called for respect for human rights for all, including those in marginalized communities vulnerable to stigma; some Members reiterated their views that laws, policies and practices by state or non-state actors that criminalize or stigmatize consensual same-sex behaviour may hamper response interventions. It was advised that public health best practices include a harm reduction approach with efforts to overcome barriers caused by policies and laws which criminalize homosexuality or otherwise contribute to stigma and discrimination and impede efforts to control the outbreak. It was also recommended that global and national programmes should continue to engage with affected communities, work towards 1) integrating monkeypox outbreak response with HIV prevention and sexual health services where appropriate and 2) continue to strive for greater strategic support and research for most-affected countries.

Overall, the conditions that warranted the determination of the PHEIC still persist, as the monkeypox outbreak continues to constitute an extraordinary event which poses a public health risk through international spread, for which additional epidemic waves may yet be seen, and continues to require a coordinated international response to reduce the impact of the outbreak. While two members expressed views that the event did not and does not constitute a PHEIC, these were tempered by concern about the potential negative consequences of lifting the declaration at this time.



Conclusions

The Committee collectively advised the WHO Director-General that the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox continues to meet the criteria included in the definition of the PHEIC provide by Article 1 of the IHR. Although views were expressed that the event did not and does not constitute a PHEIC, the Committee collectively recognized that the criteria embedded in the definition of the PHEIC may not be adequate at this time to inform their advice to the WHO Director-General as to whether and when this PHEIC should be terminated. In that regard, the Committee noted the ongoing process related to amendments to the IHR.

The Committee Members and Advisors provided their advice for the Temporary Recommendations to States Parties, which to a large extent continued those issued on 23 July 2022 by the WHO Director-General. The committee indicated the need to monitor the level of uptake and degree of implementation of Temporary Recommendations by States Parties, to complement the other modalities and programmatic approaches that are in place to support and monitor country outbreak response.

===

Temporary Recommendations issued by the WHO Director-General in relation to the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox

These Temporary Recommendations extend, modify or add to those issued on 23 July 2022.

These Temporary Recommendations support the goal and objectives of the Strategic Preparedness, Readiness and Response Plan for Monkeypox 2022–2032 to stop the outbreak of monkeypox, interrupt human-to-human transmission of the virus, protect the vulnerable, and minimize zoonotic transmission of the virus. They apply to States Parties according to their epidemiological situation, patterns of transmission and capacities with respect to monkeypox outbreak response. It should be assumed that any State Party may experience importation or local human-to-human transmission of monkeypox. Thus, each State Party should undertake surveillance and be ready to engage in outbreak response for suspected cases, since any case from any source may lead to human-to-human transmission. Some States Parties may have a history of, or be experiencing, zoonotic transmission or may observe spillback of monkeypox from humans to animals. Finally, States Parties in a position to support scaling up access to vaccines, diagnostics and therapeutics, including through technology transfer, should make every effort to do so.

In implementing these temporary recommendations (defined under the IHR as “non-binding advice issued by WHO pursuant to Article 15 of the IHR for application on a time-limited, risk-specific basis, in response to a public health emergency of international concern, so as to prevent or reduce the international spread of disease and minimize interference with international traffic”), States Parties should do so in full respect for the dignity, human rights and fundamental freedoms of persons, in line with the principles set out in Article 3 of the IHR.

WHO documents referenced below are current as of 20 October 2022.

MODIFIED: Readiness (1): These recommendations are meant to ensure a state of readiness for an outbreak of monkeypox and apply to ALL States Parties

MODIFIED: 1.a. Activate or establish health and multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms to strengthen all aspects of readiness for responding to monkeypox and stop human-to-human transmission, including a comprehensive One Health approach. Monkeypox Strategic Preparedness, Readiness, and Response Plan (SPRP); Monkeypox outbreak 2022 - Global (who.int); Multi-country outbreak of monkeypox, External situation report #8 - 19 October 2022 (who.int)

MODIFIED: 1.b. Plan for, and/or implement, interventions to avoid the stigmatization and discrimination against any individual or population group that may be affected by monkeypox, with the goal of preventing further undetected transmission of monkeypox virus. The focus of these interventions should be: to promote voluntary self-reporting and care seeking behaviour; to support access to diagnostic services, vaccines and therapeutics; to facilitate timely access to quality clinical care; and to protect human rights to health, privacy and dignity of affected individuals and their contacts across all communities.

Risk communication and community engagement for monkeypox outbreaks, interim guidance

Risk communication and community engagement public health advice on understanding, preventing and addressing stigma and discrimination related to monkeypox (who.int)

MODIFIED: 1.c. Noting that Clade II monkeypox virus is a sexually transmissible infection, establish and intensify epidemiological disease surveillance, including access to reliable, affordable and accurate diagnostic tests, for illness consistent with monkeypox as part of existing national surveillance and health care systems. For disease surveillance purposes, case definitions for suspected, probable and confirmed cases of monkeypox should be adopted, as well as the case definition for death related to monkeypox.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Surveillance-2022.3; https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-laboratory-2022.1

EXTENDED: 1.d. Intensify the detection capacity by raising awareness and training health workers, including those in primary care, genitourinary and sexual health clinics, urgent care/emergency departments, dental practices, dermatology, paediatrics, HIV services, infectious diseases, maternity services, obstetrics and gynaecology, and other acute care facilities.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Surveillance-2022.3

Online introductory training. Monkeypox: Introduction | OpenWHO

Online extended training. Monkeypox epidemiology, preparedness and response | OpenWHO

These online trainings are available in many languages.

EXTENDED: 1.e. Raise awareness about monkeypox virus transmission, related prevention and protective measures, and symptoms and signs of monkeypox among communities that are currently affected in other countries (e.g., importantly, but not exclusively, gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (MSM) or individuals with multiple sexual partners) as well as among other population groups that may be at risk (e.g., male and female sex workers, transgender people).

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-RCCE-2022.1

Public advice for men who have sex with men on preventing monkeypox

Public health advice for sex workers on monkeypox (who.int)

EXTENDED: 1.f. Engage key community-based groups, sexual health and civil society networks to increase the provision of reliable and factual information about monkeypox and its potential transmission to and within populations or communities that may be at increased risk of infection.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-RCCE-2022.1

Public advice on protecting yourself from monkeypox (who.int)

EXTENDED: 1.g. Focus risk communication and community support efforts on settings and venues where intimate encounters take place (e.g., gatherings focused on MSM, sex-on-premises venues). This includes engaging with and supporting community-led organizations, the organizers of large and smaller scale events, as well as with owners and managers of sex on premises venues to promote personal protective measures and risk-reducing behaviour.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Gatherings-2022.1

MODIFIED: 1.h. As soon as the first cases are detected, report probable and confirmed cases of monkeypox, and deaths related to monkeypox, to WHO through channels established under the provisions of the IHR using the minimum data set contained in the WHO Case Report Form (CRF).

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Surveillance-2022.3; https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Clinical_CRF-2022.3

MODIFIED: 1.i. Implement all actions necessary to be ready to apply or continue applying the set of Temporary Recommendations enumerated under Outbreak Response (2) below in the event of first-time or renewed detection of one or more suspected, probable or confirmed cases of monkeypox.

https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/monkeypox-strategic-preparedness--readiness--and-response-plan-(sprp)

MODIFIED: Outbreak response (2): All States Parties with one or more cases of monkeypox, regardless of the initial source, or experiencing human-to-human transmission, including in key population groups communities at high risk of exposure

EXTENDED: 2.a. Implementing coordinated response

EXTENDED: 2.a.i. Implement response actions with the goal of stopping human-to-human transmission of monkeypox virus, with a priority focus on communities at high risk of exposure, which may differ according to context and include gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (MSM). Those actions include: targeted risk communication and community engagement, case detection, supported isolation of cases and treatment, contact tracing, and targeted immunization for persons at high risk of exposure for monkeypox.

https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/monkeypox-strategic-preparedness--readiness--and-response-plan-(sprp)

EXTENDED: 2.a.ii. Empower affected communities and enable and support their leadership in devising, contributing actively to, and monitoring the response to the health risk they are confronting. Extend technical, financial and human resources to the extent possible and maintain mutual accountability on the actions of the affected communities.

https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/monkeypox-strategic-preparedness--readiness--and-response-plan-(sprp)

EXTENDED: 2.a.iii. Implement response actions with the goal of protecting vulnerable groups (immunosuppressed individuals, children, pregnant women) who may be at increased risk of severe monkeypox disease. Those actions include: targeted risk communication and community engagement, case detection, supported isolation of cases, contact tracing, and treatment. These may also include targeted immunization, which takes into careful consideration the risks and benefits for the individual in shared clinical decision-making.

https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/monkeypox-strategic-preparedness--readiness--and-response-plan-(sprp)

EXTENDED: 2.b. Engaging and protecting communities

MODIFIED: 2.b.i. Raise awareness about monkeypox virus transmission, actions to reduce the risk of onward transmission to others and clinical presentation in communities affected by the outbreak, which may vary by context, and promote the uptake and appropriate use of prevention measures, including supporting equitable access to primary preventive vaccination for persons at risk of exposure, and adoption of other informed risk mitigation measures. In different contexts, these measures include limiting skin to skin contact or other forms of close contact with others while symptomatic, promoting the reduction of the number of sexual partners where relevant including with respect to events with venues for sex on premises, and use of personal protective measures and practices, including during, and related to, small or large gatherings of communities at high risk of exposure.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-RCCE-2022.1

Vaccines and immunization for monkeypox: Interim guidance, 24 August 2022 (who.int)

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Gatherings-2022.1

MODIFIED: 2.b.ii. Engage with authorities and event organizers of gatherings (large and small), including those likely to be conducive for encounters of an intimate nature or that may include venues for sex-on-premises, to promote personal protective measures and behaviours, encourage organizers to apply the WHO-recommended risk-based approach to decision-making regarding the holding of such events. All necessary information should be provided for risk communication on personal choices around preventive measures including the role of vaccines and reduction in numbers of partners, and for infection prevention and control including regular cleaning of event venues and premises.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Gatherings-2022.1



https://extranet.who.int/ihr/eventinformation/all-announcements

EXTENDED: 2.b.iii. Develop and target risk communication and community engagement interventions, including systematic social listening (e.g., through digital platforms), for emerging perceptions, concerns, and misinformation that might hamper response actions.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-RCCE-2022.1

Public Advice (who.int)

EPI-WIN (who.int)

WHO releases a public health taxonomy for social listening on monkeypox conversations

EXTENDED: 2.b.iv. Engage with representatives of affected communities, non-government organizations, elected officials and civil society, and behavioural scientists to advise on approaches and strategies to avoid stigmatization of any individual or population groups in the implementation of appropriate interventions, so that care seeking behaviour, testing and access to preventive measures and clinical care are equitable and timely, and to prevent undetected transmission of monkeypox virus.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-RCCE-2022.1

Risk communication and community engagement public health advice on understanding, preventing and addressing stigma and discrimination related to monkeypox (who.int)

EXTENDED: 2.c. Surveillance and public health measures

EXTENDED: 2.c.i. Intensify surveillance for illness compatible with monkeypox as part of existing national surveillance schemes, including access to reliable, affordable and accurate diagnostic tests.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Surveillance-2022.3

EXTENDED: 2.c.ii. Report to WHO, on a weekly basis and through channels established under the provision of the IHR, probable and confirmed cases of monkeypox, including using the minimum data set contained in the WHO Case Report Form (CRF).

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Surveillance-2022.3



The WHO Global Clinical Platform for monkeypox

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Clinical_CRF-2022.3

MODIFIED: 2.c.iii. Strengthen laboratory capacity (including through international specimen referral as needed), and support within-country decentralized access to testing, wherever feasible, for the diagnosis of monkeypox virus infection, and related surveillance, based on the use of nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT), such as real time or conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR).

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-laboratory-2022.1



EXTENDED: 2.c.iv. Strengthen genomic sequencing, and international specimen referral capacities, building on existing sequencing capacities worldwide, to determine circulating virus clades and their evolution, and share genetic sequence data through publicly accessible databases.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-laboratory-2022.1

MODIFIED: 2.c.v. Isolate cases for the duration of the infectious period. Policies related to the isolation of cases should encompass health, psychological, material and essential support to adequate living. Any adjustment of isolation policies late in the isolation period should entail the mitigation of any residual public health risk. Advise cases, during the isolation period, on how to minimise the risk of onward transmission.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Clinical-and-IPC-2022.1

Public advice on protecting yourself from monkeypox (who.int)

Public advice on recovering from monkeypox at home (who.int)

REMOVED (merged with previous): 2.c.vi. During the isolation period, cases should be advised on how to minimise the risk of onward transmission.

EXTENDED: 2.c.vii. Conduct contact tracing among individuals in contact with anyone who may be a suspected, probable, or confirmed case of monkeypox, including: contact identification (protected by confidentiality), management, and follow-up for 21 days through health monitoring that may be self-directed or supported by public health officers. Policies related to the management of contacts should encompass health, psychological, material and essential support to adequate living.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Surveillance-2022.3

EXTENDED: 2.c.viii. Consider the targeted use of second- or third-generation smallpox or monkeypox vaccines (hereafter referred to as vaccine(s)) for post-exposure prophylaxis in contacts, including household, sexual and other contacts of community cases and health workers where there may have been a breach of personal protective equipment (PPE).

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Immunization-2022.2-eng

highlights_sage_oct_2022.pdf (who.int)

MODIFIED: 2.c.vix. Consider the use of vaccines for primary preventive (pre-exposure) vaccination, particularly for persons and communities at high risk of exposure. Persons at highest risk of exposure in the multi-country outbreak are gay, bisexual or other MSM with multiple partners. Others at risk may include individuals with multiple casual sexual partners, sex workers, and those who may be exposed and at risk for more severe disease. Those at risk may also include health workers at risk of repeated exposure, laboratory personnel working with orthopoxviruses, and clinical laboratory personnel performing diagnostic testing for monkeypox.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Immunization-2022.2-eng

highlights_sage_oct_2022.pdf (who.int)

Public health advice for sex workers on monkeypox (who.int)

EXTENDED: 2.c.ix. Convene the National Immunization Technical Advisory Group for any decision about immunization policy and the use of vaccines. These should be informed by risks-benefits analysis. In all circumstances, vaccinees should be informed of the time required for protective immunity potentially offered by vaccination to be effective.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Immunization-2022.2-eng

EXTENDED: 2.c.xi. Engage the communities at high risk of exposure in the decision-making process regarding any vaccine roll out.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Immunization-2022.2-eng

ADDED: 2.c.xii. Undertake thorough risk assessments, prepare for, and rapidly respond to any case or outbreak of monkeypox in congregate settings including hospitals, prisons, migrant worker residences, or other situations where population density may be high, including facilities for internally displaced persons or refugees.

20221019_Monkeypox_external_sitrep-8.pdf

EXTENDED: 2.d. Clinical management and infection prevention and control

MODIFIED: 2.d.i. Establish and use recommended clinical care pathways and protocols for the screening, triage, isolation, testing, and clinical assessment of suspected cases of persons with monkeypox in all clinical settings where persons with compatible clinical syndromes may present, including but not limited to urgent or primary care, sexual health services and dermatology clinics; provide training to health care providers accordingly and monitor implementation of those protocols.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Clinical-and-IPC-2022.1

EXTENDED: 2.d.ii. Establish and implement protocols related to infection prevention and control (IPC) measures, encompassing engineering and administrative and the use of PPE; provide training to health care providers accordingly, and monitor the implementation of those protocols.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Clinical-and-IPC-2022.1

EXTENDED: 2.d.iii. Provide health and laboratory workers with adequate PPE, as appropriate for health facility and laboratory settings, and provide all personnel with training in the use of PPE.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Clinical-and-IPC-2022.1

MODIFIED: 2.d.iv. Establish, update, and implement evidence-based clinical protocols for the care and management of patients with uncomplicated monkeypox (e.g., keeping lesions clean, pain control, and maintaining adequate hydration and nutrition) and the various manifestations of severe disease; prevention and treatment of acute complications; and monitoring and management of mid- or long-term sequelae, including provision of social and psychological support where needed. Establish monkeypox case detection and care through integrated approaches with established sexual health and HIV prevention and care services, including through community engagement with civil society organizations.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Clinical-and-IPC-2022.1

Public advice on recovering from monkeypox at home (who.int)

EXTENDED: 2.d.v. Harmonise data collection and report clinical outcomes, using the WHO Global Clinical Platform for Monkeypox.

https://www.who.int/tools/global-clinical-platform/monkeypox

EXTENDED: 2.e. Medical countermeasures and research

EXTENDED: 2.e.i. Make all efforts to use existing or new vaccines against monkeypox within a framework of collaborative clinical efficacy studies, using standardized design methods and data collection tools for clinical and outcome data, to rapidly increase evidence generation on efficacy and safety, collect data on effectiveness of vaccines (e.g., such as comparison of one or two dose vaccine regimens), and conduct vaccine effectiveness studies. Vaccines and immunization for monkeypox: Interim guidance; WHO Monkeypox research - Study designs to address knowledge gaps for monkeypox vaccines

EXTENDED: 2.e.ii. Make all efforts to use existing or new therapeutics and antiviral agents for the treatment of monkeypox cases within a framework of collaborative clinical efficacy studies, using standardized design methods and data collection tools for clinical and outcome data, to rapidly increase evidence generation on efficacy and safety.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Clinical-and-IPC-2022.1

The WHO Global Clinical Platform for Monkeypox

WHO CORE PROTOCOL - An international adaptive multi-country randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blinded trial of the safety and efficacy of treatments for patients with monkeypox virus disease

EXTENDED: 2.e.iii. When the use of vaccines and antivirals for monkeypox in the context of a collaborative research framework is not possible, use under expanded access protocols can be considered, such as the Monitored Emergency Use of Unregistered and Investigational Interventions (MEURI), under certain circumstances, using harmonized data collection for clinical outcomes (such as the WHO Global Clinical Platform for Monkeypox).

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240041745

ADDED: 2.e.iv. Encourage, support and facilitate data gathering and priority research in areas of work relevant to monkeypox, including but not limited to disease transmission and the natural history of disease; diagnostics and innovative technologies including point-of-care tests, viral kinetics across specimen types and animal diagnostics; behavioural insights research and studies on effectiveness of interventions; exposure risk for health workers and pre- and post-exposure management; research on zoonotic transmission of monkeypox at the human-animal-environment interface, including, socio-economic and behavioural risk factors, and indications for environmental surveillance in wastewater.

https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/monkeypox-strategic-preparedness--readiness--and-response-plan-(sprp)

WHO R&D blueprint and monkeypox

One Health Joint Plan of Action to address health threats to humans, animals, plants and environment

Monkeypox - World Organisation for Animal Health

MODIFIED: 2.f. Domestic and international travel

MODIFIED: 2.f.i. Adopt and apply the following measures:

- Any individual who is considered a suspected, probable, or confirmed case of monkeypox by jurisdictional health authorities should avoid undertaking any travel, including international travel, until they are cleared to do so. Anyone who is unwell should be advised to seek medical attention prior to travel.

- Any individual who has been identified as a contact of a monkeypox case, and is therefore subject to health monitoring, should avoid undertaking any travel, including international travel, while under the health monitoring period, except for contacts for whom pre-departure arrangements to ensure continuity of health monitoring are agreed upon by the health authorities concerned, or, in the case of international travel, between national health authorities. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Surveillance-2022.3

Exemptions apply for any person who is a case or contact and who may need to undertake travel to seek urgent medical care or flee from life threatening situations, such as conflict or natural disasters.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Surveillance-2022.3



- Cross-border workers, who are identified as contacts of a monkeypox case, and, hence, under health monitoring, can continue their routine daily activities provided that health monitoring is duly coordinated by the jurisdictional health authorities from both/all sides of the border.

EXTENDED: 2.f.ii. Establish operational channels between health authorities, transportation authorities, and conveyances and points of entry operators to:

- Facilitate international contact tracing in relation to individuals who have developed signs and symptoms compatible with monkeypox virus infection during travel or upon return;

- Provide communication materials at points of entry on signs and symptoms consistent with monkeypox; infection prevention and control; and on how to seek medical care at the place of destination;

EXTENDED: WHO advises against any additional general or targeted international travel-related measures other than those specified in paragraphs 2.f.i and 2.f.ii.

MODIFIED: Zoonotic transmission (3): States Parties, with known or suspected zoonotic transmission of monkeypox, including those where zoonotic transmission is known to occur or has been reported in the past, those where presence of monkeypoxvirus has been documented in any animal species, and those where infection of animals may be suspected or anticipated including in domestic pets, livestock or wildlife in newly affected countries. These recommendations apply to all States Parties.

EXTENDED: 3.a. Establish or activate collaborative One Health coordination or other mechanisms at federal, national, subnational and/or local level, as relevant, between public health, veterinary, and wildlife authorities for understanding, monitoring and managing the risk of animal-to-human and human-to-animal transmission in natural habitats, forested and other wild or managed environments, wildlife reserves, domestic and peri-domestic settings, zoos, pet shops, animal shelters and any settings where animals may come into contact with domestic waste.

One Health Joint Plan of Action to address health threats to humans, animals, plants and environment

Monkeypox - WOAH - World Organisation for Animal Health

MODIFIED: 3.b. Undertake detailed case investigations and studies to characterize transmission patterns, including suspected or documented spillovers from, and spillback, to animals. In all settings, and particularly for States Parties in the African and Eastern Mediterranean Regions, case investigation forms should be updated and adapted to elicit information on the full range of possible exposures and modes of both zoonotic and human-to-human transmission, including through sexual contact. Share the findings of these endeavours including ongoing case reporting with WHO.

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MPX-Clinical_CRF-2022.3

MODIFIED: Development and deployment of medical countermeasures (4): These recommendations applies to all States Parties, and particularly including those with capacity to innovate, develop and/or manufacture medical countermeasures

MODIFIED: 4.a. States Parties should pursue and/or support research, development and manufacturing capacity for monkeypox diagnostics, vaccines or therapeutics to enhance availability in an equitable manner and raise production.

https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/monkeypox-strategic-preparedness--readiness--and-response-plan-(sprp)

WHO Emergency Appeal: Monkeypox - July 2022 – June 2023

EXTENDED: 4.b. States Parties and manufacturers should work with WHO to ensure diagnostics, vaccines, therapeutics, and other necessary supplies are made available based on equity, public health needs, solidarity and at reasonable cost to countries where they are most needed to support efforts to stop the onward spread of monkeypox.

https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/monkeypox-strategic-preparedness--readiness--and-response-plan-(sprp); WHO Emergency Appeal: Monkeypox - July 2022 – June 2023

===
WHO has launched a call for short films for the 4th edition of the Health for All Film Festival.

“The WHO Health for All Film Festival has become an incredible platform for telling powerful stories from around the world about people who face all kinds of health challenges, and those who devote their lives to improving health,” said WHO Director-General, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. “Films provide an authentic way for affected people to connect with others and contribute to a better understanding of the communities we serve.”



The call for short films (up to 8 minutes long) opens on 31 October 2022 and will close on 31 January 2023. WHO invites public institutions, nongovernmental organizations, communities of patients and of health workers, students in public health and film schools from around the world to submit their original short film. The festival is also open to independent film-makers, production companies and TV broadcasters.

Around 70 shortlisted films will be presented to the public in April 2023 via WHO’s Youtube channel and website. From this list, a jury of distinguished professionals, artists, activists and senior experts at WHO will select the award-winning films. Sharon Stone, critically acclaimed actress from the USA and public advocate of health and humanitarian issues, has confirmed that she will join the jury again in 2023, having participated in the 2022 festival. (https://youtu.be/ahM7dwXZs8k).

Three “GRAND PRIX” will be awarded, one for each main category, aligned with WHO’s major global public health goals: universal health coverage, health emergencies, better health and wellbeing. There will also be special prizes for films about climate change and health, sexual and reproductive health and rights, a student-produced film, and a very short film (1’ to 2’30” in length).

Winning films from the festival are helping to increase awareness and support for key health issues worldwide. With an average of 1150 submissions each year from 110 countries, the films are increasingly being used by other institutions and partners for health promotion and education, and future synergies are being explored with WHO Academy and WHO Behavioural Insights programme.

“Storytelling is an engagement between people. It’s not just someone making a film, it’s someone watching a film,” said WHO Executive Director of Health Emergencies Programme, Dr Mike Ryan, film festival juror in 2021. “This is exactly how WHO should be transforming: Transforming how we engage with the world and this festival is just one example of how we can change our mindset.”

In honour of WHO’s 75th anniversary in 2023, this call for films is also exceptionally open to historical films and to recent films by students sharing their vision about current challenges and future solutions to improve health. A special playlist will be created to highlight these testimonies.

* * *



For more details, visit the multilingual festival website: https://www.who.int/film-festival
Plan sets out the partnership’s key priorities and ways of working, as countries transition to managing COVID-19 as a long-term public health issue

The plan’s focus is on vaccinating high-risk populations, introducing new treatments, boosting testing and securing sustained access to COVID-19 tools

The Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator is a global collaboration to accelerate development, production, and equitable access to COVID-19 tests, treatments, and vaccines.

The Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator today launches its plan for the next six months, setting out how, as a partnership of global health agencies working alongside government, civil society and other partners, it will support countries as the world transitions to long-term COVID-19 control.



Recognizing the evolving nature of the COVID-19 virus and pandemic, the plan outlines changes to ACT-A’s set-up and ways of working, to ensure countries continue to have access to COVID-19 tools in the longer term, while maintaining the coalition’s readiness to help address future disease surges.



Developed through a consultative process with ACT-A agencies, donors, industry partners, civil society organizations (CSOs) and Facilitation Council members, the plan summarizes priority areas of focus for the partnership’s pillars, coordination mechanisms and other core functions, and highlights the work to be maintained, transitioned, sunset, or kept on standby. The transition plan supports the work of ACT-A agencies as they evolve the financing, implementation and mainstreaming of their COVID-19 efforts.



The next phase of ACT-A partners’ work will centre on three overarching areas:

Focusing research and development (R&D) and market shaping activities to ensure a pipeline for new and enhanced COVID-19 tools

to ensure a pipeline for new and enhanced COVID-19 tools Securing institutional arrangements for sustained access for all countries to COVID-19 vaccines, tests and treatments, including oxygen

for sustained access for all countries to COVID-19 vaccines, tests and treatments, including oxygen Concentrating in-country work on new product introduction (e.g., new oral antivirals for those at highest risk) and protection of priority populations (e.g., full vaccination of health care workers and older populations), in support of national and international targets





“As the world moves towards managing COVID-19 over the long-term, ACT-A will continue to support countries by providing access to vaccines, tests, and treatments," said WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. "But as this plan lays out, we still have a lot of work to do to achieve equitable access to these life-saving tools, with health workers and at-risk populations as our top priority.”



Other changes outlined in the plan include the transition to a new ACT-A Tracking and Monitoring Taskforce, co-chaired by senior officials of India and the US, with the political-level Facilitation Council going into ‘standby’ mode, with the capacity to reactivate if needed due to a surge in severe disease.

ACT-A agencies have driven resource mobilization efforts and this plan sets out the shift to mainstream partnership-level financing and resource mobilization into the regular work of each agency going forward. Based on the three over-arching areas of work outlined above, existing financial commitments and country demand for tools, the ACT-A agencies require an estimated US$400 million for their transition work over the next six months. The ACT-A hub will continue to provide a transparent view of ACT-A agencies’ financing situation during this period.

The ACT-Accelerator is the world’s only end-to-end solution for accelerating the development of, and equitable access to, COVID-19 vaccines, tests and treatments. This partnership has played a key role in facilitating access to COVID-19 countermeasures for low- and lower-middle-income countries throughout the pandemic, most notably:

Providing more than 1.8 billion doses of vaccine to 146 countries and territories – including 75% of the vaccines deployed in low-income countries and the majority of doses supplied to Africa – through COVAX, the vaccines pillar led by CEPI, Gavi, WHO and UNICEF.

Delivering over 161 million tests, more than halving the cost of rapid tests to under $1 per test, and supplying around 80% of tests used in Africa in the first year of the pandemic through the Diagnostics Pillar led by FIND and the Global Fund.

Delivering over 40 million COVID-19 treatment courses, investing an unprecedented US$ 1 billion in expanding sustainable oxygen access in LMICs, and initiating the delivery of new antivirals, through the Therapeutics Pillar, led by the Global Fund, Unitaid and Wellcome.

Delivering over 2 billion items of personal protective equipment (PPE), supporting health systems to deliver COVID-19 tools, and boosting their laboratory, waste management and treatment capacities, through the Health Systems and Response Connector, led by the Global Fund, WHO and the World Bank.

The Transition Plan can be accessed here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

QUOTE SHEET



Seth Berkley, CEO of Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance: “As the lead agencies of COVAX, our goal is to continually evolve to meet the needs of the communities we serve. This ability to adapt to the changing pandemic environment and its challenges has helped COVAX enable a historic global rollout at scale in the face of an unprecedented emergency. Through 2023, COVAX will continue to support lower-income countries to protect their populations. In parallel, we will be supporting countries to integrate COVID-19 vaccination into routine national immunization programs, while also preparing for surges and other worst-case scenarios.”

Ted Chaiban, Global Lead Coordinator for COVID Vaccine Country Readiness and Delivery, said: “COVID-19 vaccine delivery is most successful when it is country-driven and partners align to support government ownership by accelerating funding disbursement, leveraging political engagement, and providing technical advice and assistance. Looking to the future, it's important to have a mechanism in place grounded in the multilateral system that ensures equity in all phases of future pandemics (prevention, preparation, and response) and strengthens essential health systems.”

Dr Philippe Duneton, Executive Director of Unitaid, said: “As part of the global response to COVID-19, Unitaid, co-leader of the ACT-Accelerator's therapeutics pillar, and partners have improved access to critical oxygen supplies and facilitated adoption of life-saving therapeutics alongside vital diagnostic tests. But this is not the end of it, much work remains to be done. Despite uncertainties on how the pandemic will evolve, we must focus on building resilience at market and country level in light of unpredictable and fast evolving scenarios. COVID-19 has shown us that reaching equitable global access to medical countermeasures requires a continuum between pandemic preparedness and response efforts.”

Sir Jeremy Farrar, Director of Wellcome, said: “It’s now almost three years since Covid-19 was first discovered and no one can say for certain what will happen next. What we do know is that we can’t afford to be complacent. This pandemic is not over. We still need to improve access to vaccines, treatments and tests globally, which means fully funding the ACT-Accelerator. The Accelerator has played a pivotal, and at times lonely, role in pushing for global equity and access to be at the heart of the pandemic response, despite many of the world’s advanced economies taking a very nationalistic approach to the sharing of these lifesaving tools.

It’s vital we maintain an integrated and equitable approach to this phase of the pandemic through ACT-A, invest in developing new vaccines – ones that can block infection and transmission – and better treatments, and continue testing and sequencing the virus globally. Only then can we stop Covid-19 circulating and avoid a new variant emerging that overcomes our hard-won defences.”

Dr Richard Hatchett, CEO of CEPI, said: “Much of the world has moved into a phase of coexisting with COVID-19, but we must remain vigilant against the persistent and evolving threat that the virus represents and continue to strive for equity in terms of access to vaccines and other countermeasures. In parallel, we must continue to evolve new and better countermeasures, which provide broader immunity and can be more easily produced, while building sustainable platforms to manufacture them. For that reason global leaders must sustain their support for COVAX, ACT-A and their constituent agencies.”

Dr Bill Rodriguez, CEO of FIND, said: “Diagnostics are a critical enabler of health for all and were among the first tools deployed via ACT-A in collaboration with in-country partners. We are now entering a new phase of managing COVID-19 and stand ready to work alongside countries to integrate testing into routine health programmes, ensuring that those in need can be linked to timely treatment, while maintaining vigilance and readiness for potential new waves.”

Catherine Russell, Executive Director of UNICEF, said: “The impact of the pandemic continues to threaten decades of progress for children, so the work of the ACT-A partnership is as important as ever. UNICEF will continue working with our ACT-A partners to ensure that every country and community has equitable access to the vaccines and tools they need to combat the COVID-19 virus – and to strengthen primary health systems and other vital services like routine immunization that can save children’s lives and help them fulfil their potential.”

Peter Sands, Executive Director of the Global Fund, said: "As the world transitions towards managing COVID-19 in the longer term and preparing for the next pandemics, the Global Fund will continue working with its ACT-Accelerator partners towards building stronger health systems and ensuring equitable and efficient procurement of life-saving products.”


As part of its ongoing work to track variants, WHO's Technical Advisory Group on SARS-CoV-2 Virus Evolution (TAG-VE) met on the 24 October 2022 to discuss the latest evidence on the Omicron variant of concern, and how its evolution is currently unfolding, in light of high levels of population immunity in many settings and country differences in the immune landscape. In particular, the public health implications of the rise of some Omicron variants, specifically XBB and its sublineages (indicated as XBB*), as well as BQ.1 and its sublineages (indicated as BQ.1*), were discussed.

Based on currently available evidence, the TAG-VE does not feel that the overall phenotype of XBB* and BQ.1* diverge sufficiently from each other, or from other Omicron lineages with additional immune escape mutations, in terms of the necessary public health response, to warrant the designation of new variants of concern and assignment of a new label.

The two sublineages remain part of Omicron, which continues to be a variant of concern.

This decision will be reassessed regularly. If there is any significant development that warrant a change in public health strategy, WHO will promptly alert Member States and the public.

XBB*

XBB* is a recombinant of BA.2.10.1 and BA.2.75 sublineages. As of epidemiological week 40 (3 to 9 October), from the sequences submitted to GISAID, XBB* has a global prevalence of 1.3% and it has been detected in 35 countries. The TAG-VE discussed the available data on the growth advantage of this sublineage, and some early evidence on clinical severity and reinfection risk from Singapore and India, as well as inputs from other countries. There has been a broad increase in prevalence of XBB* in regional genomic surveillance, but it has not yet been consistently associated with an increase in new infections. While further studies are needed, the current data do not suggest there are substantial differences in disease severity for XBB* infections. There is, however, early evidence pointing at a higher reinfection risk, as compared to other circulating Omicron sublineages. Cases of reinfection were primarily limited to those with initial infection in the pre-Omicron period. As of now, there are no data to support escape from recent immune responses induced by other Omicron lineages. Whether the increased immune escape of XBB* is sufficient to drive new infection waves appears to depend on the regional immune landscape as affected by the size and timing of previous Omicron waves, as well as the COVID-19 vaccination coverage.

BQ.1*

BQ.1* is a sublineage of BA.5, which carries spike mutations in some key antigenic sites, including K444T and N460K. In addition to these mutations, the sublineage BQ.1.1 carries an additional spike mutation in a key antigenic site (i.e. R346T). As of epidemiological week 40 (3 to 9 October), from the sequences submitted to GISAID, BQ.1* has a prevalence of 6% and it has been detected in 65 countries. While there are no data on severity or immune escape from studies in humans, BQ.1* is showing a significant growth advantage over other circulating Omicron sublineages in many settings, including Europe and the US, and therefore warrants close monitoring. It is likely that these additional mutations have conferred an immune escape advantage over other circulating Omicron sublineages, and therefore a higher reinfection risk is a possibility that needs further investigation. At this time there is no epidemiologic data to suggest an increase in disease severity. The impact of the observed immunological changes on vaccine escape remains to be established. Based on currently available knowledge, protection by vaccines (both the index and the recently introduced bivalent vaccines) against infection may be reduced but no major impact on protection against severe disease is foreseen.

Overall summary

The Omicron variant of concern remains the dominant variant circulating globally, accounting for nearly all sequences reported to GISAID[1]. While we are looking at a vast genetic diversity of Omicron sublineages, they currently display similar clinical outcomes, but with differences in immune escape potential.

The potential impact of these variants is strongly influenced by the regional immune landscape. While reinfections have become an increasingly higher proportion of all infections, this is primarily seen in the background of non-Omicron primary infections. With waning immune response from initial waves of Omicron infection, and further evolution of Omicron variants, it is likely that reinfections may rise further.

The role of the TAG-VE is to alert WHO if a variant with a substantially different phenotype (e.g. a variant that can cause a more severe disease or lead to large epidemic waves causing increased burden to the healthcare system) is emerging and likely to pose a significant threat. Based on currently available evidence, the TAG-VE does not feel that the overall phenotype of XBB* and BQ.1* diverge sufficiently from each other, or from other Omicron sublineages with additional immune escape mutations, in terms of the necessary public health response, to warrant the designation of a new variant of concern and assignment of a new label, but the situation will be reassessed regularly. We note these two sublineages remain part of Omicron, which is a variant of concern with very high reinfection and vaccination breakthrough potential, and surges in new infections should be handled accordingly.

While so far there is no epidemiological evidence that these sublineages will be of substantially greater risk compared to other Omicron sublineages, we note that this assessment is based on data from sentinel nations and may not be fully generalizable to other settings. Wide-ranging, systematic laboratory-based efforts are urgently needed to make such determinations rapidly and with global interpretability.

WHO will continue to closely monitor the XBB* and BQ.1* lineages as part of Omicron and requests countries to continue to be vigilant, to monitor and report sequences, as well as to conduct independent and comparative analyses of the different Omicron sublineages.

The TAG-VE meets regularly and continues to assess the available data on the transmissibility, clinical severity, and immune escape potential of variants, including the potential impact on diagnostics, therapeutics, and the effectiveness of vaccines in preventing infection and/or severe disease.
An estimated 10.6 million people fell ill with tuberculosis (TB) in 2021, an increase of 4.5% from 2020, and 1.6 million people died from TB (including 187 000 among HIV positive people), according to the World Health Organization’s 2022 Global TB report. The burden of drug-resistant TB (DR-TB) also increased by 3% between 2020 and 2021, with 450 000 new cases of rifampicin-resistant TB (RR-TB) in 2021.This is the first time in many years an increase has been reported in the number of people falling ill with TB and drug resistant TB. TB services are among many others disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, but its impact on the TB response has been particularly severe. Ongoing conflicts across Eastern Europe, Africa and the Middle East have further exacerbated the situation for vulnerable populations.

“If the pandemic has taught us anything, it’s that with solidarity, determination, innovation and the equitable use of tools, we can overcome severe health threats. Let’s apply those lessons to tuberculosis. It is time to put a stop to this long-time killer. Working together, we can end TB,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General.

Continued challenges with providing and accessing essential TB services have meant that many people with TB were not diagnosed and treated. The reported number of people newly diagnosed with TB fell from 7.1 million in 2019 to 5.8 million in 2020. There was a partial recovery to 6.4 million in 2021, but this was still well below pre-pandemic levels.

Reductions in the reported number of people diagnosed with TB suggest that the number of people with undiagnosed and untreated TB has grown, resulting first in an increased number of TB deaths and more community transmission of infection and then, with some lag-time, increased numbers of people developing TB.

The number of people provided with treatment for RR-TB and multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) has also declined between 2019 and 2020. The reported number of people started on treatment for RR-TB in 2021 was 161 746, only about one in three of those in need.

The report notes a decline in global spending on essential TB services from US$6 billion in 2019 to US$5.4 billion in 2021, which is less than half of the global target of US$13 billion annually by 2022. As in the previous 10 years, most of the funding used in 2021 (79%) was from domestic sources. In other low- and middle-income countries, international donor funding remains crucial. The main source is the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (the Global Fund). The United States Government is the largest contributor of funding to the Global Fund and is also the largest bilateral donor; overall, it contributes close to 50% of international donor funding for TB.



“The report provides important new evidence and makes a strong case on the need to join forces and urgently redouble efforts to get the TB response back-on-track to reach TB targets and save lives,” said Dr Tereza Kasaeva, Director of WHO’s Global TB Programme. “This will be an essential tool for countries, partners and civil society as they review progress and prepare for the 2nd UN High Level Meeting on TB mandated for 2023.”

Small gains

In the midst of stalling progress, there are some successes. 26.3 million people were treated for TB between 2018 and 2021, still far short of the 40 million targets set for 2018–2022 at the UN High-Level Meeting on TB. Of the 30 high TB burden countries, those with the highest levels of treatment coverage in 2021 included Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Uganda and Zambia. The number of people provided with TB preventive treatment rebounded in 2021 to close to 2019 levels, but the cumulative total of 12.5 million between 2018 and 2021 was still far from the target of 30 million by the end of 2022.

More positively, TB preventive treatment for people living with HIV has far surpassed the global target of 6 million in the period 2018-2022, reaching more than 10 million in only 4 years. Seven countries – India, Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe – collectively accounted for 82% of those started on preventive treatment in 2021.

Seven high TB burden countries in the region - Ethiopia, Kenya, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia- have reached or surpassed the 2020 milestone of a 20% reduction in the TB incidence rate compared with 2015.

Countries are also increasing the uptake of new tools and guidance recommended by WHO, resulting in early access to TB prevention and care and better outcomes. The proportion of people diagnosed with TB who were initially tested with a rapid diagnostic increased from 33% in 2020 to 38% in 2021. 109 countries were using all-oral longer regimens (up from 92 in 2020) for the treatment of MDR/RR-TB, and 92 were using shorter regimens (up from 65 in 2020).

There has been increased access to shorter (1–3 months) rifamycin-based regimens for TB preventive treatment. In 2021, 185 350 people in 52 countries were reported to have been treated with rifapentine-containing regimens, up from 25 657 in 37 countries in 2020.

The report reiterates its call for countries to put in place urgent measures to restore access to essential TB services. It further calls for increased investments, multisectoral action to address the broader determinants that influence TB epidemics and their socioeconomic impact as well as the need for new diagnostics, drugs and vaccines. To intensify vaccine development, building on lessons from the pandemic, WHO will be convening a high-level summit in early 2023.

The 2022 report features data on trends of disease and the response to the epidemic from 215 countries and areas, including all 194 WHO Member States.





Note to the editor

Global TB targets

In 2014 and 2015, all Member States of WHO and the UN adopted the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and WHO’s End TB Strategy. The SDGs and End TB Strategy both include targets and milestones for large reductions in TB incidence, TB deaths and costs faced by TB patients and their households.

In 2018, countries convened at the United Nations (UN) high-level meeting on TB committed to speed up work towards ambitious targets to treat an additional 40 million people with TB and provide preventive treatment to at least 30 million people at risk of developing the disease by 2022.



TB facts

TB, the second (after COVID- 19) deadliest infectious killer, is caused by bacteria (Mycobacterium tuberculosis) that most often affect the lungs. It can spread when people who are sick with TB expel bacteria into the air – for example, by coughing.

Most people who develop the disease are adults –in 2021 - men accounted for 56.5% of the TB burden, adult women accounted for 32.5% and children for 11%. Many new cases of TB are attributable to five risk factors: undernutrition, HIV infection, alcohol use disorders, smoking and diabetes.

TB is preventable and curable. About 85% of people who develop TB disease can be successfully treated with a 4/6-month drug regimen; treatment has the added benefit of curtailing onward transmission of infection.

Economic and financial barriers can affect access to health care for TB diagnosis and completion of TB treatment; about half of TB patients and their households face catastrophic total costs due to TB disease. Progress towards universal health coverage (UHC), better levels of social protection and multisectoral action on broader TB determinants are all essential to reduce the burden of TB disease.

While there is TB in every part of the world, 30 countries carry the highest burden. These include: Angola, Bangladesh, Brazil, Central African Republic, China, Congo, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Gabon, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Thailand, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam and Zambia.
WHO appreciates the broad range of views on the ACT-Accelerator (ACT-A) setup, operations and results that are captured in the External Evaluation, which was commissioned by the ACT-A Facilitation Council. Of particular value in this report are the perspectives expressed by a number of countries in Africa, South America and Asia that used ACT-A processes and services during the pandemic, but whose voices have not always been heard in such reviews.



While acknowledging the limitations that have been cited by the authors and other commentators, this report does provide important perspectives that add to the growing number of evaluations, reports, reviews and recommendations that aim to inform the establishment of a stronger countermeasures platform. Collectively, this work will help shape efforts to build on the experience of ACT-A and other instruments and initiatives (e.g. the Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) Framework, the ‘100 Day Mission’) to ensure the world can rely on a more robust platform for accelerating the development, and equitable allocation and delivery of countermeasures in future pandemics.

Of particular note in this report is the strong, majority position of survey respondents that the innovative and collaborative ACT-A arrangement was the right approach for accelerating access to COVID-19 countermeasures at a time when the global community needed to act quickly and decisively to combat a poorly understood threat. The report also documents important results that were achieved through the ACT-A approach, including the unprecedented speed of its core agencies in delivering vaccines and diagnostics to the lowest income countries, as compared to previous pandemics, and in driving crucial market interventions that substantially reduced prices and enhanced access to diagnostics, oxygen and antivirals at a critical time. The counterfactual is that in the absence of ACT-A, equity in access to countermeasures would have been much worse.

WHO concurs with the challenges identified in the areas of the Health Systems Connector (vs. the HSRC) and the quality assurance of rapid diagnostics. With respect to the former, this lesson was learned and corrected in the course of ACT-A, with the Connector being substantially revamped and relaunched in 2021 (a point that is not fully reflected in the report). Addressing gaps in WHO’s capacity to assess the very high volume of diagnostics submissions during the course of the pandemic was inherently more challenging and signals the vital need for additional financing and personnel for this area, adjustments to the assessment process for emergency situations, and greater support from collaborating agencies.



The report also reinforces previously identified shortcomings in the ACT-A operating model that were largely the result of the urgency and speed with which ACT-A had to be established.

These findings support the existing consensus on the vital need to ensure the future countermeasures platform is more inclusive, has greater transparency in its operations and establishes robust mechanisms for collective accountability. The report particularly highlights the need to completely rethink and rework key processes with low- and lower-middle income countries to ensure their full and meaningful engagement. An important omission in this evaluation is an assessment of the role and impact of industry in ACT-A through its participation in the Facilitation Council, Principals Group and some Pillars, and the degree to which this did or did not facilitate the coalition’s core objective of ensuring equitable access to vaccines, tests and treatments in real time.

In formulating other recommendations on the way forward, however, the report seems to have based some important conclusions on incomplete information or a misunderstanding of key aspects of the ACT-A collaboration. This appears to be the case in areas such as how targets for product volumes were established, the original ambition for the COVAX Facility, the nature of the COVID Vaccines Delivery Platform (CoVDP) and its mode of operations, and the key role of individual ACT-A agencies in resource mobilization. Most importantly, and contrary to the data presented, the report could inadvertently lead readers to conclude that creating a more robust countermeasures platform is best achieved by starting from scratch, rather than building on the considerable, documented strengths of the ACT-A collaboration and its three product pillars. The framing of an important survey question(s) may have contributed to this perspective. From a pragmatic perspective, it would seem more advantageous to harness and build on the substantial experience that international health agencies and partners have gained through their work in ACT-A, while also addressing the shortcomings of this model.

Notwithstanding these issues, the perspectives captured in this report strongly reinforce the need for an inclusive, robust process that engages countries, relevant international health agencies and organizations, civil society and community organizations, donors, industry and other stakeholders, to co-create a countermeasures platform that is anchored in the principles of speed and equity. This process will need to be informed by all such reviews and experience to optimize upstream operations (e.g. R&D, market shaping), downstream work (e.g. procurement, delivery), collective accountability and financing. WHO will take such a process forward with partners and stakeholders and with urgency, because, as the evaluation report again emphasizes, this cannot wait for the next pandemic.

WHO is deeply grateful for the extraordinary role that Norway and South Africa have played in co-chairing the ACT-A Facilitation Council throughout these turbulent times, and for commissioning this External Evaluation that is an important contribution to our collective efforts to build a safer, fairer world, together.
Almost 500 million people will develop heart disease, obesity, diabetes or other noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) attributable to physical inactivity, between 2020 and 2030, costing US$ 27 billion annually, if governments don’t take urgent action to encourage more physical activity among their populations.

The Global status report on physical activity 2022, published today by the World Health Organization, measures the extent to which governments are implementing recommendations to increase physical activity across all ages and abilities.

Data from 194 countries show that overall, progress is slow and that countries need to accelerate the development and implementation of policies to increase levels of physical activity and thereby prevent disease and reduce burden on already overwhelmed health care systems.

Less than 50% of countries have a national physical activity policy, of which less than 40% are operational

Only 30% of countries have national physical activity guidelines for all age groups

While nearly all countries report a system for monitoring physical activity in adults, 75% of countries monitor physical activity among adolescents, and less than 30% monitor physical activity in children under 5 years

In policy areas that could encourage active and sustainable transport, only just over 40% of countries have road design standards that make walking and cycling safer.

"We need more countries to scale up implementation of policies to support people to be more active through walking, cycling, sport, and other physical activity. The benefits are huge, not only for the physical and mental health of individuals, but also for societies, environments, and economies...” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General, “We hope countries and partners will use this report to build more active, healthier, and fairer societies for all.”

The economic burden of physical inactivity is significant and the cost of treating new cases of preventable non-communicable diseases (NCDs) will reach nearly US$ 300 billion by 2030, around US$ 27 billion annually.

Whilst national policies to tackle NCDs and physical inactivity have increased in recent years, currently 28% of policies are reported to be not funded or implemented. Considered a “best buy” for motivating populations to combat NCDs, the report showed that only just over 50% of countries ran a national communications campaign, or organised mass participation physical activity events in the last two years. The COVID-19 pandemic has not only stalled these initiatives, but it also affected other policy implementation which has widened inequities in access to and, opportunities for, engaging in physical activity for many communities.

To help countries increase physical activity, WHO’s Global action plan on physical activity 2018-2030 (GAPPA) sets out 20 policy recommendations – including policies to create safer roads to encourage more active transport, provide more programmes and opportunities for physical activity in key settings, such as childcare, schools, primary health care and the workplace. Today’s Global Status report assesses country progress against those recommendations, and shows that much more needs to be done. One critical finding in the Global status report on physical activity is the existence of significant gaps in global data to track progress on important policy actions – such as provision of public open space, provision of walking and cycling infrastructure, provision of sport and physical education in schools. The report also calls for weaknesses in some existing data to also be addressed.

“We are missing globally approved indicators to measure access to parks, cycle lanes, foot paths – even though we know that data do exist in some countries. Consequently, we cannot report or track the global provision of infrastructure that will facilitate increases in physical activity, “said Fiona Bull, Head of WHO Physical Activity Unit. “It can be a vicious circle, no indicator and no data leads to no tracking and no accountability, and then too often, to no policy and no investment. What gets measured gets done, and we have some way to go to comprehensively and robustly track national actions on physical activity.”

The report calls for countries to prioritize physical activity as key to improving health and tackling NCDs, integrate physical activity into all relevant policies, and develop tools, guidance and training to improve implementation.

“It is good for public health and makes economic sense to promote more physical activity for everyone,” said Dr Ruediger Krech, Director Department of Health Promotion, WHO. “We need to facilitate inclusive programmes for physical activity for all and ensure people have easier access to them. This report issues a clear call to all countries for stronger and accelerated action by all relevant stakeholders working better together to achieve the global target of a 15% reduction in the prevalence of physical inactivity by 2030.”

Data for the report are drawn from the WHO Noncommunicable Disease Country Capacity Survey (2019 and 2022) and the WHO Global status report on road safety (2018).

The cost of inaction on physical inactivity to healthcare systems manuscript at Preprints with The Lancet (peer-reviewed version forthcoming in The Lancet Global Health)
A strained global supply of cholera vaccines has obliged the International Coordinating Group (ICG) — the body which manages emergency supplies of vaccines — to temporarily suspend the standard two-dose vaccination regimen in cholera outbreak response campaigns, using instead a single-dose approach.

The pivot in strategy will allow for the doses to be used in more countries, at a time of unprecedented rise in cholera outbreaks worldwide.

Since January this year, 29 countries have reported cholera cases, including Haiti, Malawi and Syria which are facing large outbreaks. In comparison, in the previous 5 years, fewer than 20 countries on average reported outbreaks. The global trend is moving towards more numerous, more widespread and more severe outbreaks, due to floods, droughts, conflict, population movements and other factors that limit access to clean water and raise the risk of cholera outbreaks.

The one-dose strategy has proven to be effective to respond to outbreaks, even though evidence on the exact duration of protection is limited, and protection appears to be much lower in children. With a two-dose regimen, when the second dose is administrated within 6 months of the first, immunity against infection lasts for 3 years.

The benefit of supplying one dose still outweighs no doses: although the temporary interruption of the two-dose strategy will lead to a reduction and shortening of immunity, this decision will allow more people to be vaccinated and provide them protection in the near term, should the global cholera situation continue deteriorating.

The current supply of cholera vaccines is extremely limited. Its use for emergency response is coordinated by the ICG which manages the global stockpile of oral cholera vaccines. Of the total 36 million doses forecast to be produced in 2022, 24 million have already been shipped for preventive (17%) and reactive (83%) campaigns and an additional 8 million doses were approved by the ICG for the second round for emergency vaccination in 4 countries, illustrating the dire shortage of the vaccine. As vaccine manufactures are producing at their maximum current capacity, there is no short-term solution to increase production. The temporary suspension of the two-dose strategy will allow the remaining doses to be redirected for any needs for the rest of the year.

This is a short-term solution but to ease the problem in the longer term, urgent action is needed to increase global vaccine production.

The ICG will continue to monitor the global epidemiological trends as well as the status of the cholera vaccine stockpile, and will review this decision regularly.

About the ICG

The ICG is an international group that manages and coordinates the provision of emergency vaccine supplies and antibiotics to countries during major disease outbreaks. It manages the global stockpile of the oral cholera vaccine. The group is composed of members of WHO, Médecins Sans Frontières, UNICEF and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.

The ICG was established in 1997, following major outbreaks of meningitis in Africa, as a mechanism to manage and coordinate the provision of emergency vaccine supplies and antibiotics to countries during major outbreaks.

Since the establishment of the cholera vaccine stockpile in 2013, 120 million doses of oral cholera vaccine doses have been shipped to 23 countries, of which 73 million (60%) has been approved for emergency response.
Today, global leaders confirmed US$ 2.6 billion in funding toward the Global Polio Eradication Initiative’s (GPEI) 2022-2026 Strategy to end polio at a pledging moment co-hosted by Germany’s Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) at the World Health Summit in Berlin.

The funding will support global efforts to overcome the final hurdles to polio eradication, vaccinate 370 million children annually over the next five years and continue disease surveillance across 50 countries.

“No place is safe until polio has been eradicated everywhere. As long as the virus still exists somewhere in the world, it can spread – including in our own country. We now have a realistic chance to eradicate polio completely, and we want to jointly seize that chance,” said Svenja Schulze, Federal Minister for Economic Cooperation and Development, Germany. “Germany will remain a strong and committed partner in the global fight against polio. This year, it is providing EUR 35 million for this cause. And next year we plan to further strengthen our efforts and support GPEI with EUR 37 million – pending parliamentary approval. By supporting the GPEI, we are also strengthening national health systems. That leads to healthier societies, far beyond the polio response.”

Wild poliovirus is endemic in just two countries – Pakistan and Afghanistan. However, after just six cases were recorded in 2021, 29 cases have been recorded so far this year, including a small number of new detections in southeast Africa linked to a strain originating in Pakistan. Additionally, outbreaks of cVDPV, variants of the poliovirus that can emerge in places where not enough people have been immunized, continue to spread across parts of Africa, Asia and Europe, with new outbreaks detected in the United States, Israel and the United Kingdom in recent months.

“The new detections of polio this year in previously polio-free countries are a stark reminder that if we do not deliver our goal of ending polio everywhere, it may resurge globally,” said Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “We are grateful for donors’ new and continued support for eradication, but there is further work to do to fully fund the 2022-2026 Strategy. We must remember the significant challenges we have overcome to get this far against polio, stay the course and finish the job once and for all.”

At a challenging time for countries around the world, governments and partners have stepped forward to demonstrate their collective resolve to eradicate the second human disease ever. In addition to existing pledges, new commitments to the 2022-2026 Strategy this fall include:

Australia pledged AU$ 43.55 million

pledged AU$ 43.55 million France pledged EUR 50 million

pledged EUR 50 million Germany pledged EUR 72 million

pledged EUR 72 million Japan pledged US$ 11 million

pledged US$ 11 million Republic of Korea pledged KRW 4.5 billion

pledged KRW 4.5 billion Luxembourg pledged EUR 1.7 million

pledged EUR 1.7 million Malta pledged EUR 30 000

pledged EUR 30 000 Monaco pledged EUR 450 000

pledged EUR 450 000 Spain pledged EUR 100 000

pledged EUR 100 000 Turkey pledged US$ 20 000

pledged US$ 20 000 United States pledged US$ 114 million

pledged US$ 114 million Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation pledged US$S 1.2 billion

pledged US$S 1.2 billion Bloomberg Philanthropies pledged US$ 50 million

pledged US$ 50 million Islamic Food and Nutrition Council of America pledged US$ 1.8 million

pledged US$ 1.8 million Latter-day Saint Charities pledged US$ 400 000

pledged US$ 400 000 Rotary International pledged US$ 150 million

pledged US$ 150 million UNICEF pledged US$ 5 million

The pledging moment in Berlin marked the first major opportunity to pledge support toward the US$ 4.8 billion needed to fully implement the 2022-2026 Strategy. If the Strategy is fully funded and eradication achieved, it is estimated that it would result in US$ 33.1 billion in health cost savings this century compared to the price of controlling outbreaks. Further, continued support for GPEI will enable it to deliver additional health services and immunizations alongside polio vaccines to underserved communities.

"Children deserve to live in a polio-free world, but as we have seen this year with painful clarity, until we reach every community and vaccinate every child, the threat of polio will persist," said UNICEF Executive Director Catherine Russell. "UNICEF is grateful for the generosity of our donors and the pledges made today, which will help us finish the job of eradicating polio. When we invest in immunization and health systems, we are investing in a safer, healthier future for everyone, everywhere.”

In addition to the funding for GPEI announced today, a group of more than 3 000 influential scientists, physicians, and public health experts from around the world released a declaration endorsing the 2022-2026 Strategy and calling on donors to stay committed to eradication and ensure GPEI is fully funded. The group points to new tactics contained in the program’s strategy, like the continued roll-out of the novel oral polio vaccine type 2 (nOPV2), that make them confident in GPEI’s ability to end polio. Five hundred million doses of nOPV2 have already been administered across 23 countries, and field data continue to show its promise as a tool to more sustainably stop outbreaks of type 2 cVDPV. The group further asserts that support for eradication significantly strengthens immunization systems and pandemic preparedness around the world—pointing to GPEI’s support for the COVID-19 response—and urges endemic and polio-affected country leadership to stay committed to expanded vaccination and disease surveillance activities.

“Pakistan has made incredible progress against polio, but recent challenges have allowed the virus to persist,” says Dr. Zulfi Bhutta (Chair of Child Global Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Canada, and Distinguished University Professor, Aga Khan University, Pakistan). “Polio, like any virus, knows no borders; its continued transmission threatens children everywhere. Stopping this disease is not just urgently needed now, it’s within our grasp. That’s why I’ve joined more than three thousand health experts from around the world to launch the 2022 Scientific Declaration on Polio Eradication. With strong financial and political commitments, our long-awaited vision of a polio-free world can become a reality.”





Additional quotes from the pledging moment

Mark Suzman, CEO, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, said: “The question is not whether it’s possible to eradicate polio—it’s whether we can summon the will and the resources to finish the job. The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation is grateful to Germany, Rotarians, donors, countries, scientists, and partners who stood together today to show that we are united in this goal. We look forward to working together to create a polio-free future and build more equitable and resilient health systems for all."

Seth Berkley, CEO, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, said: “As we work together to stop the transmission of all polioviruses globally, we are more grateful than ever for the generosity of our donors, the leadership of governments and the mobilization of communities. Today’s pledges will support GPEI’s new strategy which correctly focuses on mass vaccination campaigns, concerted efforts by partners to strengthen essential immunization and integration with other critical health interventions and a further roll out of next-generation oral polio vaccines. These three measures combined are essential if we are to eradicate polio once and for all.”

Franz Fayot, Minister for Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Affairs, Luxembourg, said: “Luxembourg is proud to be a longstanding supporter of global efforts to eradicate polio. Building on the remarkable progress achieved so far, Luxembourg will continue to support the fight against polio until we ensure the protection of every child.”

Ian Riseley, Chair, Rotary Foundation, said: “While polio exists anywhere, it is a threat everywhere. This is an opportune moment for the global community to recommit to the goal and ensure the resources and political will are fully available to protect children from polio paralysis while building stronger health systems. That is why today, Rotary is reaffirming its commitment of an additional USD 150 million to the global effort to eradicate polio.”

His Excellency Abdul Rahman Al Owais, Minister of Health and Prevention, United Arab Emirates, said: “Polio outbreaks this year have emphasized that polio anywhere is a threat to communities everywhere. While we are encouraged by steady progress in Pakistan and Afghanistan in the drive towards polio eradication, we know that there is a ways to go to finish the job. We also know that this progress would not have been possible without the courageous contributions of frontline health workers, who have remained steadfast in their commitment to protecting their communities from polio in the face of the pandemic, natural disasters and threats to their physical safety. Under the leadership of His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the UAE, we join our international partners in reiterating our commitment to a polio free world."





Notes for editors

The Global Polio Eradication Initiative is a public-private partnership led by national governments with six core partners – Rotary International, the World Health Organization (WHO), the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), UNICEF, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance. For more information on the global effort to end polio, visit polioeradication.org.
The WHO Director-General has the pleasure of transmitting the Report of the thirteenth meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR) Emergency Committee regarding the coronavirus 2019 disease (COVID-19) pandemic, held on Thursday, 13 October 2022, from 12:00 to 16:00 CEST.



The WHO Director-General concurs with the advice offered by the Committee regarding the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and determines that the event continues to constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).



The WHO Director-General considered the advice provided by the Committee regarding the proposed Temporary Recommendations. The set of Temporary Recommendations issued by the WHO Director-General is presented at the end of this statement.



The WHO Director-General expresses his sincere gratitude to the Chair, and Members of the Committee, as well as to the Committee’s Advisors.



===



Proceedings of the meeting



The WHO Director-General, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, welcomed Members and Advisors of the Emergency Committee, all of whom were convened by videoconference.



Dr Tedros highlighted that weekly reported COVID-19 deaths have reached levels comparable to the beginning of the pandemic and that almost two-thirds of the world’s population has completed a primary course of COVID-19 vaccination. However, he expressed concern over persistent inequities in vaccine coverage and access to antiviral and therapeutic treatments between countries, reductions in epidemiological and laboratory surveillance activities for COVID-19 that are necessary to monitor the evolution and impact of the virus, and the removal of many public health and social measures ahead of the expected increase in transmission over the coming months, particularly during the approaching winter in the Northern hemisphere.

The Representative of the Office of Legal Counsel briefed the Members and Advisors on their roles and responsibilities and the mandate of the Emergency Committee under the relevant articles of the IHR.



The Ethics Officer from the Department of Compliance, Risk Management, and Ethics briefed Members and Advisers on their roles and responsibilities. Members and Advisors were also reminded of their duty of confidentiality as to the meeting discussions and the work of the Committee, as well as their individual responsibility to disclose to WHO, in a timely manner, any interests of a personal, professional, financial, intellectual or commercial nature that may give rise to a perceived or direct conflict of interest. Each Member and Advisor who was present was surveyed. No conflicts of interest were identified.

The meeting was handed over to the Chair of the Emergency Committee regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, Professor Didier Houssin. The Chair introduced the objectives of the meeting: to provide views to the WHO Director-General on whether the COVID-19 pandemic continues to constitute a PHEIC, and to review temporary recommendations to States Parties.



The WHO Secretariat presented a global overview of status of the COVID-19 pandemic and highlighted several challenges to the ongoing response. The presentation focused on the global COVID-19 epidemiological situation; the ongoing evolution and unpredictability of the virus and the impact of current and future SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern, including descendent lineages of these variants; concurrent circulation of other respiratory viruses including influenza; progress towards WHO COVID-19 vaccination targets, including targets for the highest priority groups in all countries; and planning scenarios for the ongoing response to COVID-19 and ending the emergency globally.



Deliberative session



The Committee acknowledged progress in controlling the outbreak in many countries with the number of severe cases and deaths substantially decreased and high levels of population immunity achieved in many countries through vaccination and/or infection, leading to resumption of economic and social life and lifting of most COVID-19-related restrictions.



However, the Committee was concerned that despite being well into the third year of the pandemic, there remained considerable uncertainties as to the further trajectory of the virus as well as to the genetic and antigenic characteristics and clinical impact of future variants. The Committee also remained concerned over the increasing challenges in quantifying the broader COVID-19 burden on health systems including thrombotic and endocrine complications as well as the extent and burden of Post COVID-19 condition. More broadly, Committee members recognized that many health systems remain under pressure because of other health emergencies and competing health priorities, in addition to the challenges posed by COVID-19. In this context, the Committee expressed concern about the heavy workload and associated burnout being experienced by health care workers worldwide, leading to an increased deficit in the workforce.



The Committee also expressed concern over the reduction in epidemiological and laboratory surveillance for SARS-CoV-2. This impedes assessments of currently circulating and emerging variants of the virus, including genomic and phenotypic assessments, and hinders abilities to interpret trends in transmission and burden of disease. The Committee continued to highlight the importance of expediting the integration of COVID-19 surveillance into other routine surveillance systems, including the integration of COVID-19 surveillance with the surveillance of other respiratory pathogens, community-based surveillance, and the potential value of supplementing it with wastewater surveillance.

The Committee acknowledged the ongoing work of WHO and partners to achieve WHO- and SAGE-recommended vaccination targets, particularly reaching 100% vaccination coverage among those in the highest priority groups. Nonetheless, concern remained as to the lack of sharing of data needed to monitor progress of vaccination campaigns, and–where data is available–the persistent inequities in access to vaccines as well as to WHO-recommended therapeutics. These inequities in access have resulted in many COVID-19 deaths that may have otherwise been avoided. The Committee acknowledged the disruption the pandemic continues to have on routine (non–COVID-19) immunization activities, which has repeatedly manifested as outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases in areas where essential immunization activities have lapsed since early 2020.

The Committee recognized that many national COVID-19 policies reflect a perception that the emergency may be over and that governments, healthcare workers and societies in general are experiencing "COVID-19 fatigue." The Committee therefore emphasized the need to enhance social listening and community engagement as means to better tailor risk communications and contextualize policies, that will help people to continue to take the actions needed to protect their health. The Committee highlighted persistent misinformation related to many aspects of the COVID-19 response, particularly the dangers posed by pervasive disinformation on vaccination, vaccine hesitancy and the convergence of organized anti-vaccination efforts in many countries.



Status of the Public Health Emergency of International Concern



The Committee noted a clear decoupling of case incidence from severe disease, and the high seroprevalence estimates resulting from combined infection and/or vaccination across all WHO regions. Seroprevalence data may not necessarily reflect true immune protection but seems to reflect protection against severe disease, and such studies continue to be important to monitor immune response over time.



In assessing the criteria for a public health emergency of international concern, the Committee agreed that, although the public perception is that the pandemic is over in some parts of the world, it remains a public health event that continues to adversely and strongly affect the health of the world’s population, that there remains a risk of new variants exacerbating the ongoing health impact, particularly as winter approaches in the Northern hemisphere (and learning from the Southern Hemisphere), and there is still a need for a coordinated international response to address the inequalities in access to life-saving tools.



In advising the WHO Director-General that the event still constitutes a PHEIC, the Committee developed the following arguments underpinning its advice.



First, the clear decoupling in incident cases and severe disease has led to a perception in communities that the emergency may be over and that measures to reduce transmission are no longer warranted. Although the number of weekly deaths reported to WHO is near the lowest since the pandemic began, it remains high compared with other respiratory viruses, and the added burden of COVID-19 related complications and Post COVID-19 Condition is also high and its full impact not completely understood. The evolution of the outbreak during the upcoming winter season in the Northern hemisphere must also be considered.

Second, although ongoing evolution of the virus is expected to continue, the genetic and antigenic characteristics of future variants cannot yet be reliably predicted, partly due to the current gaps in global surveillance that hinder identifying and evaluating these changes early. In addition, the ongoing virus evolution, with potentially increased properties of immune escape, may pose challenges to current vaccines and therapeutics.

Finally, inequities in access to COVID-19 vaccines and therapeutics persist between and within countries, such that the highest priority groups do not currently have access to safe and effective vaccine and therapeutics everywhere.



Given the above considerations, the Committee concurred that continued coordination of the international response is necessary to reliably evaluate the health impact of the pandemic, monitor and assess the evolution of the virus and the impact of future variants, to intensify efforts to ensure access to safe and effective countermeasures, and to enhance tailored risk communication and community engagement activities.



Overall, the Committee considered that the situation remains dynamic and requires frequent reassessments, and that the termination of the PHEIC, when considered feasible, should be implemented as safely as possible. To this end, the Committee requested the WHO Secretariat to provide additional assessment and analysis for an intersessional discussion to further support the Committee’s deliberations. The Committee also recommended to review the potential negative consequences of terminating the PHEIC, as well as to consider the relevant provisions of the IHR (2005) in relation to temporary recommendations, which can continue to be formally issued after the termination of a PHEIC, or to standing recommendations.

The Committee considered that, in view of the current situation, whereby the response efforts in many countries have reduced the burden of COVID-19, but at the same time inequalities in access to life-saving interventions and uncertainties with regard to the evolution of the virus still persist, the Temporary Recommendations require an enhanced focus on three key priorities: strengthen integrated surveillance and achieve vaccination targets for at risk-groups; continue to develop strategies to increase access to affordable therapeutics; strengthen pandemic preparedness planning, while continuing to protect the most-at risk populations.

The rationale for these priority recommendations is to ensure that the following occur:



the appropriate strategies, systems and resources are in place to detect any adverse change in the epidemiology of COVID-19, due, for example, to the emergence of a new more transmissible variant with more immune escape, capable of causing more severe disease; Member States have the necessary capacity to surge public health and social measures in response to a new event; the global population is appropriately protected by an effective and equitable vaccination programme; strategies continue to be developed that increase equitable access to affordable therapeutics, and progress towards a robust global pandemic preparedness architecture is maintained.

The Committee anticipates that meaningful progress with implementing these measures would create a situation compatible with terminating the PHEIC related to the COVID-19 pandemic at a future meeting, and that the situation could continue to be characterized as pandemic even if the PHEIC is terminated. The Committee further believes that these recommendations will support appropriate public health messaging on the evolving risk of COVID-19, despite community and political “pandemic fatigue.”



===

Temporary Recommendations issued by the WHO Director-General to all States Parties

1. Strengthen SARS-CoV-2 surveillance in humans to maintain (or, where needed, enhance) capacity to detect and assess emerging variants and significant changes to COVID-19 epidemiology and to focus on better understanding the burden of COVID-19 in all regions, and its impact on health and public health services. It is recommended that States Parties prepare for sustainable integration of SARS-CoV-2 surveillance with other surveillance systems, and implement the WHO’s guidance on Public health surveillance for COVID-19 – interim guidance. With the upcoming Northern hemisphere influenza season and in view of the return of seasonal influenza epidemics, States Parties should further integrate disease surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 and influenza by leveraging and enhancing the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS), complemented with other surveillance models or studies, to monitor the relative co-circulation of these viruses to inform responses.



2. Strengthen (or where needed, implement) surveillance to monitor presence and evolution of SARS-COV-2 in animal populations. Continue to conduct epidemiological investigations of SARS-CoV-2 transmission at the human-animal interface and implement targeted surveillance on potential animal hosts and reservoirs.

3. Achieve national COVID-19 vaccination targets in accordance with the updated WHO Global COVID-19 Vaccine Strategy, and the WHO SAGE Prioritization Roadmap, which both emphasize fully protecting those in high priority groups.

4. Support timely uptake of accurate therapeutics and timely SARS-CoV-2 testing, linked to WHO recommended therapeutics. States Parties should provide access to COVID-19 treatments for vulnerable populations, particularly immunosuppressed people, and improve access to specific early treatments for patients at higher risk for severe disease outcomes. Global efforts to increase access to affordable therapeutics should be enhanced. Local production and technology transfer related to vaccines, other therapeutics and diagnostics should be encouraged and supported, as increased production capacity can contribute to global equitable access to therapeutics.

5. Maintain the strong national response to the COVID-19 pandemic by updating national preparedness and response plans in line with the priorities and potential scenarios outlined in the 2022 WHO Strategic Preparedness, Readiness and Response Plan and the recently published WHO COVID-19 policy briefs.

6. Address the infodemic, risk communications and community engagement challenges, and the divergent perceptions in risk between scientific communities, political leaders and the general public.

7. Continue to adapt the use of appropriate effective, individual-level protective measures to reduce transmission, appropriately tailored to the changing epidemiological context including changing risks associated with future variants of concern, and the need to tailor public health and social measure with such changes, including as relevant for mass gathering events.

8. Maintain essential health, social, and education services, in particular access to essential immunization services.

9. Continue to adjust any remaining international travel-related measures, based on risk assessments, and to not require proof of vaccination against COVID-19 as a prerequisite for international travel.
Today at the World Health Summit, in front of an audience including more than 40 parliamentarians from 30 different countries, WHO signed a Memorandum of Understanding with UNITE, Parliamentarians Network for Global Health.

This represents a new step in strengthening WHO engagement with parliaments. With this agreement, UNITE commits to support WHO in raising awareness and building capacity of parliamentarians in three strategic areas of global public health: equitable access to health, with a focus on universal health coverage; health system strengthening, with a focus on supporting sustainable financing for global health; and efficient global health architecture and security, with a focus on the creation of the global health architecture and security, and the promotion of the pandemic treaty.

“Parliaments play a vital role in promoting and protecting health, by putting in place the legislative, regulatory and budgetary measures that can prevent diseases, and create the conditions for health to thrive,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “WHO is committed to working with parliaments and parliamentary platforms. We welcome the collaboration with UNITE, which will be instrumental in mobilizing parliamentary support, in particular for sustainable financing and strengthening the global health architecture."

Dr Ricardo Baptista Leite, President and Founder of UNITE added: “For the last five years, the UNITE Parliamentarians Network for Global Health has been actively promoting evidence-based policy making, in an effort led by our members from more than 85 countries. As current and former members of parliaments, congresses and senates from around the world, we are committed to ensuring that our actions, as politicians and agents for change, lead to a more equitable society in which no one is left behind. UNITE envisions this collaboration as an opportunity to ensure that trustworthy scientific recommendations are delivered to parliamentarians, leading towards new laws and policies that ensure Health is a reality for all. This partnership will empower both UNITE and WHO in achieving our ambitions goals together.”

For more information about UNITE: https://www.unitenetwork.org/

For more information about WHO parliamentary engagement: Elisa Scolaro, External Relations officer, parliamentary engagement, WHO. [email protected]
A new UN report shows that women’s and children’s health has suffered globally, as the impacts of conflict, the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change converge with devastating effects on prospects for children, young people and women.



Data presented in the report show a critical regression across virtually every major measure of childhood well-being, and many key indicators of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Since the last Every Woman Every Child Progress Report published in 2020, food insecurity, hunger, child marriage, risks from intimate partner violence, and adolescent depression and anxiety have all increased.



An estimated 25 million children were un- or under-vaccinated in 2021 – 6 million more than in 2019 - increasing their risk of contracting deadly and debilitating diseases. Millions of children missed out on school during the pandemic, many for more than a year, while approximately 80% of children in 104 countries and territories experienced learning-loss because of school closures. Since the start of the global pandemic, 10.5 million children lost a parent or caregiver to COVID-19.



“At the core of our unkept promise is the failure to address the gaping inequities at the root of global crises, from the COVID-19 pandemic to conflicts and the climate emergency. The report describes the impacts of these crises on women, children and adolescents, from maternal mortality to education losses to severe malnutrition,” said Antonio Guterres, United Nations Secretary-General.



The report provides wide-ranging evidence that children and adolescents face wildly divergent chances of leading a healthy life simply based on where they are born, their exposure to conflict, and the economic circumstances of their families. For example:



A child born in a low-income country has an average life expectancy at birth of around 63 years, compared to 80 in a high-income country. This devastating 17-year survival gap has changed little over recent years. In 2020, 5 million children died even before the age of 5, mostly from preventable or treatable causes. Meanwhile, most maternal, child, and adolescent deaths and stillbirths are concentrated in just two regions – sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia.



More than 45 million children had acute malnutrition in 2020, a life-threatening condition which leaves them vulnerable to death, developmental delays and disease. Nearly three-quarters of these children live in lower-middle-income countries. A staggering 149 million children were stunted in 2020. Africa is the only region where the numbers of children affected by stunting increased over the past 20 years, from 54.4 million in 2000 to 61.4 million in 2020.



The six countries with the highest numbers of internally displaced persons – Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen – are also among the top 10 food insecure countries.



A woman in sub-Saharan Africa has around a 130 times higher risk of dying from causes relating to pregnancy or childbirth than a woman in Europe or North America. Coverage of antenatal care, skilled birth attendance, and postnatal care is far from reaching all women in low- and middle- income countries, leaving them at elevated risk of death and disability.

Millions of children and their families are experiencing poor physical and mental health from recent humanitarian disasters in Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Pakistan, Somalia, Ukraine and Yemen. In 2021, a record 89.3 million people worldwide were driven from their homes by war, violence, persecution, and human rights abuse.



The report calls upon the global community to address this damaging trajectory and protect the promises made to women, children, and adolescents in the Sustainable Development Goals. In particular, it advocates for countries to continue investing in health services, to address all crises and food insecurity, and empower women and young people around the world.



The report, titled Protect the Promise, is published by global partners, including WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, Partnership for Maternal, Newborn & Child Health (PMNCH) and Countdown to 2030, as a bi-annual summary of progress in response to the UN Secretary General's Every Woman Every Child Global Strategy for Women, Children's and Adolescents' Health. The most comprehensive synthesis of evidence on the current state of maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health, it updates the last Every Woman Every Child Global Strategy Progress Report published in 2020.



Quote sheet:



“Almost three years on from the onset of COVID-19, the pandemic’s long-term impact on the health and well-being of women, children and adolescents is becoming evident: their chances for healthy and productive lives have declined sharply,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “As the world emerges from the pandemic, protecting and promoting the health of women, children and young people is essential for supporting and sustaining the global recovery.”



“The impacts of COVID-19, conflicts, and climate crises have raised the stakes for vulnerable communities, revealing the weaknesses and inequities in health care systems and reversing hard-won progress for women, children, and adolescents – but we are not powerless to change this,” said UNICEF Executive Catherine Russell. “By investing in resilient, inclusive primary health care systems, jumpstarting routine immunization programmes, and strengthening the health workforce, we can make sure that every woman and every child can access the care they need to survive and thrive.”



“There is a crisis of inequity that is piling on already increasing and compounding threats. In a world where too many children, adolescents and women are dying, equity, empowerment and access are what needs urgent focus,” said H.E. Ms. Kersti Kaljulaid, Global Advocate for Every Woman Every Child and President of the Republic of Estonia, 2016-2021. “We are calling on all to think and act broadly and profoundly to protect the promise. This promise refers not only to the commitments made in the Sustainable Development Goals, and all of the campaigns that followed, but also to the larger promise of potential that everyone is born with. Too often this promise remains unclaimed, or even denied.”



“In the face of increasing political pushback against sexual and reproductive health and rights in many countries, women, children and adolescents today are left without many of the protections of just a decade ago, and many others still have not seen the progress they need,” said Dr. Natalia Kanem, UNFPA Executive Director. “Access to sexual and reproductive health services, including contraception, is a fundamental right that directly and acutely affects the ability of women and adolescent girls to thrive. We need to expand these rights and services to the most marginalized, leaving no one behind.”



“The report advocates for countries to continue investing in health services, in all crises, and to re-imagine health systems that can truly reach every woman, child, and adolescent, no matter who they are or where they live,” said the Rt. Hon Helen Clark, Board Chair of PMNCH (The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn & Child Health) and former Prime Minister of New Zealand. “Experts and world leaders are calling for more women in policy- and decision-making at every level, meaningful engagement with young people, and primary health care systems which deliver what people need when and where they need it most.”



###

Notes to editor:



Download multimedia content here

Access infographics and data here

The report will be launched at the World Health Summit in Berlin on 18 October 2022 at 9 AM GMT+2 at a session where the findings will be discussed by world leaders and young people. The session can be joined in person or virtually.

Speakers include:
The World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF welcomed today funding agreements from the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre (KSrelief) valued at US$ 10 million to further bolster polio and measles programmes in eight countries. The agreement was signed on the sidelines of the World Health Summit in Berlin.



The new funding will provide UNICEF and WHO with US$ 5 million each in response to a call for emergency action by WHO and UNICEF to avert major polio and measles epidemics. WHO and UNICEF have urged countries to prioritize vaccination for children as they rebuild their immunization systems following major global immunization disruptions caused by COVID-19. The pandemic has left millions of vulnerable children at heightened risk of preventable childhood diseases.

With this generous contribution from KSrelief, WHO will support the polio and measles programmes in Somalia, Iraq, and Sudan through the procurement of laboratory equipment; enhancing surveillance; digitalisation of EPI; strengthening the cold chain; and trainings of campaign vaccinators. UNICEF will support the five high-risk countries of Afghanistan, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, and Pakistan with the procurement and in-country distribution of polio and measles vaccines and supplies like cold chain equipment and syringes; recruitment and training of vaccinators; and sustainably strengthening immunization systems.

“COVID-19 has had a devastating effect on immunisation services globally," said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of WHO. "KSrelief's generous support will help WHO to save children’s lives, benefiting an estimated 50 million people and averting major outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases including polio and measles in Somalia, Iraq and Sudan."

“We can't let COVID-19 drive new epidemics of childhood disease, " said UNICEF Executive Director Catherine Russell. "The pandemic disrupted routine immunization services around the world, leaving millions of vulnerable children at heightened risk of polio, measles and other preventable childhood diseases. This new agreement will translate into lives saved and stronger immunization systems that will benefit millions of children.”

Dr Abdullah Al Rabeeah, Supervisor General of King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre (KSrelief) stated: “This cooperation agreement will strengthen global action to protect vulnerable children at increased risk from preventable childhood diseases; it also affirms the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia's dedication to saving lives and safeguarding futures. The agreement is the result of the Kingdom’s commitment to working with the WHO and UNICEF to jointly address global health challenges.”

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

At the World Health Summit, which brings together governments, donors, civil society and advocates, UNICEF and WHO renewed calls for urgent action to avert measles and polio epidemics and reaffirm commitments to eradicate vaccine-preventable diseases.
Today, a new One Health Joint Plan of Action was launched by the Quadripartite – the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the World Health Organization (WHO), and the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH, founded as OIE).

This first joint plan on One Health aims to create a framework to integrate systems and capacity so that we can collectively better prevent, predict, detect, and respond to health threats. Ultimately, this initiative seeks to improve the health of humans, animals, plants, and the environment, while contributing to sustainable development.

The One Health Joint Plan of Action, developed through a participatory process, provides a set of activities that aim to strengthen collaboration, communication, capacity building, and coordination equally across all sectors responsible for addressing health concerns at the human-animal-plant-environment interface.



The One Health Joint Plan of Action (OH JPA)

The five-year plan (2022-2026) focuses on supporting and expanding capacities in six areas: One Health capacities for health systems, emerging and re-emerging zoonotic epidemics, endemic zoonotic, neglected tropical and vector-borne diseases, food safety risks, antimicrobial resistance and the environment.

This technical document is informed by evidence, best practices, and existing guidance. It covers a set of actions which endeavour to advance One Health at global, regional and national levels. These actions notably include the development of an upcoming implementation guidance for countries, international partners, and non-State actors such as civil society organizations, professional associations, academia and research institutions.

The plan sets out operational objectives, which include: providing a framework for collective and coordinated action to mainstream the One Health approach at all levels; providing upstream policy and legislative advice and technical assistance to help set national targets and priorities; and promoting multinational, multi-sector, multidisciplinary collaboration, learning and exchange of knowledge, solutions and technologies. It also fosters the values of cooperation and shared responsibility, multisectoral action and partnership, gender equity, and inclusiveness.



Why One Health?



One Health is the main approach for addressing the complex health challenges facing our society, such as ecosystem degradation, food system failures, infectious diseases and antimicrobial resistance.



“Using a One Health lens that brings all relevant sectors together is critical to tackle global health threats, like monkeypox, COVID-19 and Ebola.” WOAH Director General Dr Monique Eloit highlights the need for enhanced disease prevention capacity in all sectors. “It all starts with ensuring the health of animals. Animal health is our health, it is everyone’s health.”



FAO Director-General QU Dongyu adds, “ One Health should start from proper land management and stopping deforestation, which will help people and their animals in the surrounding environment. We need all sectors working closely together to identify and implement adaptation and mitigation measures.”



UNEP Executive Director Inger Andersen says that “Everyone has the right to a clean and healthy environment - the foundation of all life on Earth. The current pandemic unequivocally demonstrates that the degradation of nature is driving up health risks across the board.” Efforts by just one sector or specialty cannot prevent or eliminate infectious disease and other complex threats to One Health. She continued: “Vulnerable populations of all species, including the most poor and marginalized humans, bear the heaviest costs. The Joint Plan of Action will drive down health risks through an integrated approach to human, animal and environment health.”



“It’s clear that a One Health approach must be central to our shared work to strengthen the world’s defences against epidemics and pandemics such as COVID-19. That’s why One Health is one of the guiding principles of the new international agreement for pandemic prevention, preparedness and response, which our Member States are now negotiating.” WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said.

Building on existing structures and agreements, mechanisms for coordinated financing are under development to support the plan’s implementation. The Quadripartite will join forces to leverage the needed resources in support of the common approach to address critical health threats and promote the health of people, animals, plants and the environment.
WHO’s Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus today appointed the Lacks family as WHO Goodwill Ambassadors for Cervical Cancer Elimination. The appointment recognizes their efforts to champion cervical cancer prevention and to preserve the memory of Henrietta Lacks, who died from cervical cancer in 1951.

Henrietta Lacks’ story is one of injustice, with the vast contribution she made to science hidden from the world for many years. While she sought treatment for her cancer, researchers took biopsies from her body without her knowledge or consent. The cells they took, known as HeLa cells, subsequently became the first “immortal” cell line - meaning they are the only cells which have continued to live outside the human body and replicate.

Since the procedure was undertaken, these HeLa cells have contributed to countless medical breakthroughs, including the development of the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, as well as COVID-19 research.

“Much like the injustice of Henrietta Lacks’ story, women all over the world from racial and minority ethnic groups face disproportionately higher risks from cervical cancer,” said Dr Tedros. “WHO’s goal is to eliminate cervical cancer, which means the innovations created with Henrietta Lacks’ cells must be made available equitably to all women and girls. We look forward to working with the Lacks family to raise awareness on cervical cancer and advance racial equity in health and science.”

The family, represented by Henrietta Lacks' son Lawrence Lacks, Sr., and his granddaughters, Victoria Baptiste and Veronica Robinson; and Alfred Lacks Carter, Jr., Henrietta Lacks’ grandson, accepted the appointment at the World Health Summit in Berlin, during a session titled, “A Next Era for Women's Cancer Control.”

On behalf of the Lacks family, Alfred Lacks Carter, Jr. said, "Today, I humbly accept this honour to serve as a WHO Goodwill Ambassador for Cervical Cancer Elimination in the spirit of my mother - Deborah Lacks, who lost her mother, Henrietta, to Cervical Cancer, and worked to make certain the world recognizes her impact. Our Hennie's legacy lives on in us, and we will continue to stand in solidarity with WHO, patients, survivors, and families around the world to ensure that no other wife, mother, or sister dies needlessly from cervical cancer."

The appointment of the Lacks family as WHO Goodwill Ambassadors for Cervical Cancer Elimination adds momentum to the global strategy to eliminate cervical cancer, launched by WHO in 2020. The global effort represents the first time ever that WHO Member States have collectively committed to eliminate a cancer.

The strategy lists three goals that countries should reach by the year 2030: First, 90% of eligible girls should be fully vaccinated with the HPV vaccine. Second, 70% of women should be screened using a high-performance test. And third, 90% of women with pre-cancer should have access to treatment and 90% of women with invasive cancer should be managed appropriately, including access to palliative care.

Currently, a woman dies of cervical cancer every two minutes. Nearly 90% of these deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries due to inadequate access to cancer prevention, diagnosis and care. In all geographies, women in marginalized communities are disproportionately affected.

The Lacks family joins other ambassadors from WHO, including Ivorian footballer Didier Drogba, Brazilian world champion footballer Alisson Becker, Michael Bloomberg, founder of Bloomberg Philanthropies and three-term Mayor of the City of New York, Cynthia Germanotta, President of the Born This Way Foundation, and former UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown.

The Ambassadorship follows the bestowment of a special posthumous award to Henrietta Lacks from the WHO Director-General, given to her family on her behalf in 2021. It reflects WHO’s ongoing commitment to the active participation of people affected by cervical cancer as central to the elimination effort.



About Henrietta Lacks



As a young mother, Henrietta Lacks and her husband were raising five children near Baltimore when she fell ill. She went to Johns Hopkins after experiencing extensive vaginal bleeding and was diagnosed with cervical cancer. Despite treatment, it cut her life short on 4 October 1951. She was only 31 years old.

During treatment, researchers took samples of her tumour. That “HeLa” cell line became a scientific breakthrough: the first immortal line of human cells to divide indefinitely in a laboratory. The cells were mass produced, for profit, without recognition to her family. Over 50 million metric tonnes of HeLa cells have been distributed around the world.

In addition to the HPV vaccine, HeLa cells allowed for development of the polio vaccine; drugs for HIV, haemophilia, leukaemia, and Parkinson’s disease; breakthroughs in reproductive health, including in vitro fertilization; research on chromosomal conditions, cancer, gene mapping, and precision medicine; and are used in studies responding to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Lawrence Lacks, Mrs. Lacks’ 87-year-old son, is one of the last living relatives who personally knew her. Mr. Lacks shares this honor with his granddaughters Victoria Baptiste and Veronica Robinson, and his nephew Alfred Lacks Carter, Jr.



Quotes from the Lacks family



Lawrence Lacks, Sr.

Son of Henrietta Lacks

“Thank you to the World Health Organization for the honour of appointing us as WHO Goodwill Ambassadors for Cervical Cancer Elimination. I am humbled to join my granddaughters Victoria and Veronica and my nephew Alfred in accepting this commitment in honour of my mother, Henrietta Lacks. I want to thank Dr Tedros, Dr Nono, and WHO for recognizing all the good my mother has done for the world."



Victoria Baptiste, BSN, RN

Lacks Family Descendant

“As a Registered Nurse, I am deeply moved to accept this honour today to serve as a World Health Organization Goodwill Ambassador for Cervical Cancer Elimination. We know Cervical Cancer can be prevented and treated if caught early - that's why I remain committed to this mission in honour of Henrietta Lacks, who has helped make these breakthroughs possible. Together, we can end cervical cancer by educating, empowering, and mobilizing patient advocates, health-care providers, clinicians, researchers, community leaders, and policy-makers to increase prevention, screening, and treatment worldwide."



Veronica Robinson

Lacks Family Descendant

"As a patient advocate, I am dedicated to working with WHO to advance the Global Strategy to Eliminate Cervical Cancer and am grateful for the opportunity to serve as a Goodwill Ambassador. From our home in Baltimore, Maryland, to communities around the world, we are resolute in taking action to end Cervical Cancer disparities. Henrietta's HeLa cells contributed to life-saving innovations like the HPV vaccine and cervical cancer treatment. As advocates, we call upon global leaders, policy-makers, and civil society organisations to honour her legacy by providing equal access to cervical cancer education, screening, vaccination, and treatment for all people."
At the World Health Summit today in Berlin, WHO and the International Association of National Public Health Institutes (IANPHI) signed a Memorandum of Understanding outlining their joint efforts to achieve their common objectives to strengthen public health functions and health emergency preparedness.

WHO and IANPHI share the same vision that essential public health functions are a comprehensive and cost-effective approach to advance universal health coverage, health security and healthier populations.

The COVID-19 pandemic underlined the key role of national public health institutes. These institutes are at the forefront of preparedness, detection and response efforts in their respective countries. Through this new agreement, WHO and IANPHI will work together to establish or strengthen the role of national institutes, particularly in emergency preparedness and response.



“Today’s agreement is an historic moment for both organizations," said Professor Duncan Selbie, President of the IANPHI. "Formalizing this aims to strengthen national public health capacity and capability to deliver health gains through prevention and promotion measures, and emergency preparedness and response. IANPHI with its member national public health institutes look forward to this agreement making a real difference to the public’s health."

The strengthened alliance between WHO and IANPHI is critical to ensure that global and regional structures are designed to support national and local capacities and provide the right avenues for collaboration and coordination. Together WHO and IANPHI can leverage each other’s capacities to strengthen essential public health functions and emergency preparedness at national level and ultimately promote and protect the health and well-being of people.

The IANPHI is a network of 111 members in 94 countries and regions. It links and strengthens the government agencies responsible for public health. IANPHI leverages its members’ expertise to build robust public health systems, promote universal health coverage, address communicable and non-communicable diseases, and strengthen preparedness and response. IANPHI supports strengthening existing national public health institutes and development of new ones in every country.
32 benches – representing each participating FIFA World Cup nation – are being built to promote mental health.

Benches announcement coincides with today’s World Mental Health Day and symbolic inauguration event at 974 Stadium, Doha

H.E. Sheikha Hind and Sir Mo Farah unveiled England bench during World Innovation Summit for Health

A unique project involving custom-made public benches to promote the critical importance of mental health, and the role that football and sport more broadly can play to promote mental well-being, was announced today. Thirty-two “Friendship Benches” – one for each nation competing in the FIFA World Cup Qatar 2022™ – are being built for installation in prominent Doha locations, including the precincts of tournament stadiums.



The project is part of the Sport for Health partnership, led by the World Health Organization and Qatar’s Ministry of Public Health. Its goal is to demonstrate the importance of mental health and offer advice on ways to promote mental well-being, including through the importance of physical activity and sport. The initiative is supported by FIFA, the Supreme Committee for Delivery & Legacy, WISH, the Friendship Benches NGO and the WHO Universal Health Coverage Partnership.



In conjunction with World Mental Health Day, a selection of the first benches is being presented today at 974 Stadium, in Doha, one of the venues for this year’s FIFA World Cup. The bench initiative was symbolically inaugurated with the preview of the England bench at Qatar Foundation’s global health event, the World Innovation Summit for Health (WISH) in the lead-up a larger reveal of the benches on World Mental Health Day.



English athlete Sir Mo Farah, whose ten Olympic and World Championship gold medals make him the most successful male track distance runner ever, inaugurated the England bench, where he was joined by Her Excellency Sheikha Hind bint Hamad Al Thani, Vice Chairperson and CEO of Qatar Foundation, for a conversation about sport and mental health – a symbolic recognition of the initiative.



“Meeting Sir Mo and hearing the compelling story of how he left Mogadishu for London as a young boy and the mental health challenges he faced highlighted the importance of sitting down and talking about our mental health,” H.E. Sheikha Hind said. “I’m proud that Qatar Foundation’s global health initiative is among those helping shine a spotlight on mental health in such an innovative and practical way.”



The benches project aligns with common goals and campaigns of each of partner organization, including the FIFA-WHO #REACHOUT campaign, the “Are You OK?” project of the Qatar’s Ministry of Public Health, and the groundbreaking Friendship Benches project itself, originally developed in Zimbabwe and supported by WHO. The WISH event has in the past also been used as a platform to promote the Friendship Benches concept. This initiative also aims at promoting physical activity as one of the key outcomes of the Sport and Health project. To this end a special feature appearing on each bench are illustrations with advice describing easy and effective exercises that visitors can practice for their physical health.



“The bench is a simple yet powerful vehicle for promoting mental health, from park benches to football stadiums,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “The Friendship Benches project is a reminder of how the simple act of sitting down to talk can make a huge difference to mental health.”



H.E. Dr Hanan Al Kuwari, Minister of Public Health, Qatar, said the benches project was a tangible, lasting symbol of the importance of the Sport for Health partnership and the goals it is striving to achieve for the upcoming FIFA World Cup™ in Qatar – the first held in the Middle East and Arab world – and the legacy WHO and the Qatar’s Ministry of Public Health are working to leave.



“Mental health is a core component of the Sport For Health partnership and our goal is for the Friendship Benches to provide a place, during and after the FIFA World Cup, for residents and visitors to Qatar to come together and ask each other ‘Are You OK?’ and use the opportunity to engage in dialogue and physical activities,” H.E. Dr Al Kuwari said.



H.E. Hassan Al Thawadi, Secretary General, SC, said: “We are proud to support this project and further leverage our hosting of the FIFA World Cup. The benches will provide a permanent reminder of the first World Cup in the Middle East and Arab world, while promoting the importance of mental health in communities throughout the country.”

FIFA President Gianni Infantino said: “Through the #REACHOUT campaign, we acknowledged the importance of speaking with family and friends to foster positive mental health. The Friendship Benches project is another vehicle to raise awareness about mental health conditions and to encourage a conversation, which could save a life. FIFA is proud to partner with the World Health Organization, and Qatar’s Ministry of Public Health to put football at the service of society, and to leave a lasting legacy in Qatar for residents and visitors.”

Final locations of each of the 32 benches will be announced shortly. Once installed, information will be shared on how residents of Qatar and visitors will be able to visit their national benches, and others, in a show of support for mental health promotion.



---------------------------------------------------

Editor’s note:



Video footage and photographs will be shared with media from the Friendship Benches inauguration event on 10 October.



At 4pm Doha time, a live discussion hosted by WHO will be broadcast on its Facebook channel https://www.facebook.com/WHO

Contacts:



Interviews and other information:


Many low- and middle-income countries’ (LMICs) need for quality-assured vaccines is dependent on importation and are at risk of a lack of consistent supply of such products. It is recognized that local production is one of the strategies to improve timely access to quality-assured vaccine supplies, curb shortages and stock-out and safeguard health security.

Following the successful Virtual cGMP Training Marathon in 2020 and 2021, WHO Local Production and Assistance Unit (LPA) is organizing a third edition, called Virtual cGMP Advanced Training Marathon for Vaccine Manufacturing: Sustaining a GMP-compliant Environment, in respect to Member States' requests for advanced capacity building to address challenges and improve compliance to current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP) and regulatory requirements.

Organization and content

This Virtual cGMP Training Marathon focuses on current interpretations and regulatory expectations of selected GMP topics on facility design, aseptic processing, and technology transfer, aiming at developing Quality Management Systems (QMS) skills to achieve a sustainable GMP compliant environment. The Virtual cGMP Training Marathon has a new and innovative design with two parts, as follows:

Part 1- GMP Training Marathon

It includes 8 training sessions, twice per week, starting from November 8th to December 1st. The virtual lectures will include real world examples, case studies and common cGMP deficiencies found in the field, and the possible approaches to manage or prevent them. Selected topics will include for example Facility Design; Quality Risk Management (QRM); Upstream and Downstream manufacturing processes; Technology Transfer; Process validation. Q&A sessions will be conducted at the end of each session.

Considering this is an advanced course, it is strongly recommended that participants refresh their knowledge of the GMP concepts. Participants should attend all sessions to fully benefit from the training marathon and see how the topics are interconnected.



Part 2- GMP Training Marathon

Part 2 is a hands-on workshop to develop QMS skills for up to 40 participants who will carry out a group project work on real-life case studies, based on CAPA and QRM tools (e.g., Fish Bone Diagram and FMEA). The case studies are related to the knowledge gained in Part 1.

Part 2 is divided in three virtual sessions, from December 6th to 8th, 2022. Participants will be divided in 4 groups (up to 10 participants per group) in such a way that a diversity of professional backgrounds and experience are represented. Each group will work separately in virtual breakout sessions to carry out the assignment, which include the preparation of a brief presentation of the work done. The third and last session will be dedicated to present the group’s case study to the rest of the participants, interact and discuss. Full involvement and active contribution of each of the group’s members is expected during the 3 days.



A workshop examination to evaluate the participant’s knowledge and a survey for feedback will be carried out on-line after the closure of the training marathon.

Participants who attended all sessions and complete the examination and survey will receive a certificate of attendance.



Target Audience

Experienced Technical staff working in Production, Quality Assurance, Validation, Engineering, and Quality Control of vaccine/biopharmaceutical manufacturing plants and prospective vaccine manufacturing plants would benefit from this training marathon. Officers from National Regulatory Agencies and relevant government ministries/institutions are welcome to register interest to attend. As Part 2 is to build QMS skills in a manufacturing facility, priority will be afforded to technical staff working in a manufacturing plant.



Registration process

Registration of interest to participate in Part 1 and 2 is required. It is performed online by registering either for Part 1 only or for Part 1 and 2. All registrations of interest will be reviewed. Only selected registrants will receive a link for participation. The links for Part 1 and for Part 2 will be sent separately.

The selection process for attendance to Part 2, will be based on the following:

• full attendance to all 8 topics and examination score in Part 1

• professional background in their organizations (refer to Target Audience section)

• position in their organizations (priority will be afforded to positions with authority to implement changes, e.g. supervisors, managers)

• consideration of gender balance

• registration of interest is received before the deadline of 2 November

• the participant works in a manufacturing facility (priority will be afforded in decreasing order: vaccine manufacturer, biopharmaceutical manufacturer, prospective vaccine manufacturer)

• the vaccine manufacturing facility is located in a LMIC (priority will be afforded to manufacturers in Africa)

• there is at least one identified corrective and preventive action (CAPA) that the participant’s organization needs to implement

• other considerations to address public health priorities and/or needs of Member States

Due to the limited space, participants who registered and are eligible for Part 2 but are not selected for this training marathon will be granted priority for similar future hands-on training workshops in their respective country/region.

To register your interest to participate in either Part 1 only or in Part 1 and 2, click on the link below. The deadline for registration is 2nd of November 2022. REGISTRATION: Virtual cGMP Training Marathon for Vaccine Manufacturing

For more information, please contact the LPA Unit Secretariat at: [email protected]




Many low- and middle-income countries’ (LMICs) need for quality-assured vaccines is dependent on importation and are at risk of a lack of consistent supply of such products. Local production is viewed as one of the strategies to improve timely access to quality-assured vaccine supplies, curb shortages and stock-out and safeguard health security.

Following the successful Virtual cGMP Training Marathon in 2020 and 2021, WHO Local Production and Assistance Unit (LPA) is organizing a third edition, called Virtual cGMP Training Marathon for Vaccine Manufacturing: Sustaining a GMP-compliant Environment, in respect to Member States' requests for advanced capacity building to address challenges and improve compliance to current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP) and regulatory requirements.

This training welcomes the participation of experienced technical staff working in Production, Quality Assurance, Validation, Engineering, and Quality Control of vaccine/biopharmaceutical manufacturing plants, particularly from LMICs. Regulators and relevant government ministries/institutions officers are also welcomed to join. This Virtual Training offers a new and innovative design with two parts:

Part 1, an advanced course on cGMP, including lectures, case studies and Q&A sessions,

Part 2, a practical and hands-on workshop section to develop Quality Management Systems (QMS) skills.

From the 8th of November to 1st of December 2022, Part 1 will take place and two topics will be delivered each week to provide in-depth content focusing on advanced concepts of selected GMP topics, technology transfer and facility design for vaccine manufacturing. On the 6th, 7th and 8th of December 2022, Part 2 is intended to fortify the training by applying pre-selected Quality Risk Management (QRM) tools to tackle real-life GMP scenarios through hands-on group work.

To register your interest to participate to either Part 1 only or to Part 1 and 2, click here: Virtual cGMP Training Marathon for Vaccine Manufacturing - registration of interest (Deadline on 2nd of November 2022). All registrations of interest will be reviewed and only selected registrants will receive a link for participation. For more details, please refer to the flyer and to the event description.

For more information, please contact the LPA Unit Secretariat at: [email protected]
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Xavier Becerra and World Health Organization (WHO) Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus held the first U.S.-WHO Strategic Dialogue. Convened under the Biden-Harris Administration, the U.S.-WHO Strategic Dialogue provides a platform to maximize the longstanding U.S. government-WHO partnership, and to protect and promote the health of all people around the globe, including the American people.

Representatives from across the United States Government and WHO leadership discussed several priority global public health issues and areas of collaboration and partnership, including ongoing WHO strengthening efforts. The U.S. and WHO welcomed the creation of the historic new financial intermediary fund for pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response, and called on countries to help ensure it is sustainably financed and supported.

As the world looks to emerge stronger from the COVID-19 pandemic, it is clear that we must be better prepared going forward, something highlighted by recent outbreaks of monkeypox, ebola, and polio. The global health architecture comprises important entities, policies, and legal tools that assist countries to improve national, regional, and global health. An essential aspect of this architecture is the ability to prevent, detect, and respond to pandemics and other health security threats. Secretary Becerra and Director-General Tedros agreed that national and global capacities must be strong, agile, ever improving, and always fit-for-purpose. They discussed efforts underway to improve the global health architecture, to support resilient health systems, and to advance health equity.

The discussion also addressed efforts to develop a new pandemic instrument, strengthening the International Health Regulations (IHR), including through targeted amendments, as well as scaling-up of Universal Health Preparedness Review, including the Joint External Evaluation and other relevant tools, and updating global, regional, and national epidemic and One Health surveillance capabilities. It is also vital to take forward opportunities for advancing health security and primary health care, including by leveraging the extensive global health data infrastructure supported by a number of U.S. Government programs. In promoting rapid and transparent data sharing, and coordination, strengthened IHRs, and a new pandemic instrument can provide important tools to WHO Member States, including the United States, to prevent, detect, and rapidly respond to new events with pandemic potential and monitor disease control measures. This reinforcing of global health security is essential to protect the health of the world and the American people.



In addition to strengthening health emergency preparedness and response, the United States and WHO recommitted to strengthening our partnership in key areas for the world to reach the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, progress towards is a quarter of the pace needed. Accelerated progress will require resilient health systems capable of handling future health emergencies, reorienting towards integrated primary health care as a means to achieve universal health coverage, investing in comprehensive health and care workforce development and community engagement, and promoting policies that recognize the links between the environment and health to improve quality of life. Accelerating progress towards the SDGs also requires leveraging progress made in addressing HIV, TB, polio, and malaria, advancing sexual and reproductive health and rights, and empowering marginalized and vulnerable communities in global health. Furthermore, U.S. and WHO leadership also discussed progress made on budgetary and governance reform as well as WHO’s work to prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment.

Recognizing there is much more to do together to improve and promote global public health, the United States and the WHO decided to task technical experts with further development of their collaboration in 2023, including a joint work plan with a focus on activities in support of these shared leadership objectives. Secretary Becerra and Director-General Tedros will continue their positive engagement and guide the work of the technical teams with an expected update and reassessment by the next U.S.-WHO Strategic Dialogue to be held in late 2023.
The World Health Organization has announced the recommended viral composition of influenza vaccines for the 2023 southern hemisphere influenza season.

The recommendations issued today will be used by national vaccine regulatory agencies and pharmaceutical companies to develop, produce, and license influenza vaccines for the following influenza season. The periodic update of viruses contained in influenza vaccines is necessary for the vaccines to be effective due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses.

The recommendation is based on the advice of a group of experts from WHO Collaborating Centres and WHO Essential Regulatory Laboratories that analyze virus surveillance data generated by the WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (or GISRS).

Around a billion people get seasonal influenza every year and the threat of an influenza pandemic is ever-present. For this reason, the need to monitor circulating respiratory viruses, including influenza, continues to be critical. This monitoring informs the vaccine composition recommendations that WHO issues twice a year.

The year-round surveillance is conducted by GISRS, a global network of over 150 laboratories in 127 countries, areas or territories set up in 1952. This year we celebrate its 70th anniversary.

Going forward, GISRS will continue to use its unique position as a global respiratory surveillance network to add value to other respiratory virus threats, including COVID-19, where it has already played a significant role. It will also make use of emerging technologies, for example by expanding genomic surveillance, to continue to protect people from the threat of influenza.

Recommendations

WHO recommends that quadrivalent vaccines for use in the 2023 southern hemisphere influenza season contain the following:

Egg-based vaccines

an A/Sydney/5/2021 (H1N1)pdm09-like virus;

an A/Darwin/9/2021 (H3N2)-like virus;

a B/Austria/1359417/2021 (B/Victoria lineage)-like virus; and

a B/Phuket/3073/2013 (B/Yamagata lineage)-like virus.

Cell culture- or recombinant-based vaccines

an A/Sydney/5/2021 (H1N1)pdm09-like virus;

an A/Darwin/6/2021 (H3N2)-like virus;

a B/Austria/1359417/2021 (B/Victoria lineage)-like virus; and

a B/Phuket/3073/2013 (B/Yamagata lineage)-like virus.

WHO recommends that trivalent vaccines for use in the 2023 southern hemisphere influenza season contain the following:

Egg-based vaccines

an A/Sydney/5/2021 (H1N1)pdm09-like virus;

an A/Darwin/9/2021 (H3N2)-like virus; and

a B/Austria/1359417/2021 (B/Victoria lineage)-like virus.

Cell culture- or recombinant-based vaccines
Warning comes from Norway and South Africa on behalf of the ACT-Accelerator Facilitation Council, as rollout of medical countermeasures and other tools stagnate

Emphasizing the global pandemic is not over, they say coordinated action, funding and political commitments are key to saving lives and preventing economic, health and societal damage from COVID-19

New report from Council’s Diagnostics and Therapeutics Working Group sets out key recommendations for improving access to COVID-19 tests and treatments

Tracking and accelerating progress to reach everyone, everywhere

As the third UNGA of the COVID-19 pandemic reaches its conclusion, many countries are far from meeting global targets on vaccination coverage, testing rates, and access to treatments and PPE. The co-chairs of the ACT-Accelerator’s Council Tracking and Accelerating Progress working group warn that coordinated action, sustained political will and funding commitments are still needed, to save lives and combat the ongoing threat of COVID-19.

The group – co-chaired by Indonesia and the United States - is responsible for tracking progress toward the global COVID-19 targets for access to vaccines, diagnostics, treatments, and PPE, under the umbrella of the ACT-Accelerator equitable access partnership.

Ahead of several high-level events at the UNGA to take stock of progress, Indonesia’s Tri Tharyat and the United States’ Loyce Pace highlight that while progress is being made, the global threat of COVID-19 is far from over, particularly for high-risk groups in lower-income countries. According to the most recent Global COVID Access Tracker data, around a quarter of those most vulnerable globally still need a primary COVID-19 vaccination series (24% of elderly persons and 26% of health workers).

Indonesian Ambassador Tri Tharyat, Director General for Multilateral Cooperation at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said “Critical funding and political leadership is needed for the roll-out of tests, treatments and vaccines. Funding the ACT-Accelerator will support its work to expand access to life-saving tools, from new oral antivirals to booster vaccine doses, to ensure healthcare workers and those who are most at-risk are protected wherever they live in the world. We must quickly translate vaccines into vaccination. No-one is safe until everyone is safe.”

The Working Group notes with concern:

COVID-19 vaccination rates in low-income countries stand at 19%, compared to almost 75% in high-income countries.

Low income and lower-middle income countries are still far from the 100 tests per 100k population per day target; low-income countries are testing at a rate of just 2/100k population, while lower-middle income countries are at 22/100k population.

The roll-out of new lifesaving COVID-19 treatments including oral antivirals in low and lower-middle income countries remains limited or non-existent.

Equitable access to these COVID-19 countermeasures and preparation for the delivery is critical for countries to integrate the management of the virus into their primary health systems, as part of a longer-term strategy.

Loyce Pace, Assistant Secretary for Global Affairs at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, said: “Support for vaccine readiness and uptake are making an important difference to increase COVID-19 vaccine coverage and significantly reduce the number of countries with very low COVID-19 vaccination rates. Primary series coverage in the COVAX AMC 92 countries increased from 28% in January of 2022 to 51% in September. There is still progress to be made in global vaccination rates and lessons for how successful efforts might apply to testing or treatment initiatives at the country level.”

Access to tests and treatments key for those at highest risk

As a report on access to COVID-19 tests and treatments is published today, the co-chairs of the council’s Therapeutics and Diagnostics Working Group, Mustaqeem de Gama of South Africa and Ian Dalton of the United Kingdom, highlight the decline in testing rates and the lack of equitable access to new antiviral treatments for COVID-19.

The Working Group report emphasizes that diagnostics and therapeutics, and associated test-to-treat strategies, are fundamental components of pandemic response, both for COVID-19 and future health threats. The report makes sixteen recommendations for action for medium and long-term COVID-19 control, as well as the strengthening of prevention, preparedness and response (PPR).

Mustaqeem De Gama, Director of Legal International Trade at South Africa’s Department of Trade, Industry and Competition said: “The swift, equitable roll-out of vaccines, tests, and treatments is crucial to help countries combat COVID-19. Without adequate testing and sequencing, the world is blind to the evolution of the virus and potential new variants. People in low and middle-income countries continue to die due to a lack of access to antiviral treatments and oxygen. We must push on for equitable access to COVID-19 tools, despite multiple competing priorities.”

Ian Dalton, Senior Head of Pharmaceuticals and Diagnostics at the UK’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office said: “As the report shows, investments in diagnostics and therapeutics capacity for COVID-19 pays dividends for future pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. There are action points to be taken forward from the analysis undertaken by the working group, and I hope partners will see it as a springboard for action.”



Redoubling efforts and political momentum

In the context of these calls to action, a series of high-level events at the UNGA will shine a spotlight on the rollout of COVID-19 tools and the urgent need for action and continued political support to achieve equitable access.

An event hosted by the UN Secretary General on September 23rd will take stock of the global roll out of COVID-19 vaccines, diagnostics and treatments, identify priority areas to accelerate equitable access, and seek to mobilize additional political support to effectively end the pandemic this year, by accelerating vaccination rates and implementing test-to-treat strategies everywhere.

A Foreign Ministerial meeting co-chaired by Bangladesh, Botswana, Spain and the USA, as part of the COVID-19 Global Action Plan (GAP) initiative, will take place on the margins of the UNGA. It will focus on maintaining continued political engagement, coordination, and action to end the acute phase of the pandemic, including on vaccine delivery, closing information gaps, supply chain strengthening, support for health workers, access to diagnostics and treatments, and future global health security architecture.

John-Arne Røttingen, Norway’s Ambassador for Global Health, said: “We have made huge collective progress, thanks to the work of countries, ACT-A agencies, financial contributors, civil society and other partners. We call on countries to support meeting the vaccine coverage targets in all countries, as well as rolling out test and treat programs. There is still a funding gap to get this job done and all countries should make fair share contributions to ACT-Accelerator.”
Michael R. Bloomberg reappointed as WHO Global Ambassador of Noncommunicable Diseases and Injuries

New Gallup survey indicates strong global support for policies outlined in WHO report to combat growing public health burden of noncommunicable diseases

Today, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of WHO, launched a new report calling on global leaders to take urgent action on noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), responsible for 17 million premature deaths every year.

To accelerate action Dr Tedros renewed the two-year appointment of Michael R. Bloomberg as WHO Global Ambassador for Noncommunicable Diseases and Injuries. This is Bloomberg’s third reappointment as Ambassador, having first been appointed to the role in 2016.

The announcement came at the first annual gathering of a Heads of State and Government Group for the Prevention of NCDs, led by the President of Ghana and the Prime Minister of Norway [1], held during the 77th Session of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). This follows the launch of a Global NCD Compact earlier this year by Ghana and Norway.

To mark the occasion, WHO released a new report, “Invisible Numbers: The true scale of noncommunicable diseases,” and a data portal that for the first time, brings together all WHO data related to NCDs for 194 countries. The report and portal highlight the extent of global NCD burden, risk factors, and the progress each country is making in their efforts to combat these diseases and conditions. Every two seconds, someone under 70 somewhere in the world dies of an NCD. Noncommunicable diseases like heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and lung disease now outnumber infectious disease as the top killers globally.

“This report is a reminder of the true scale of the threat posed by NCDs and their risk factors,” said Dr Tedros. “There are cost-effective and globally applicable NCD interventions that every country, no matter its income level, can and should be using and benefitting from – saving lives and saving money. I thank President Afuko-Addo, Prime Minister Støre and Michael Bloomberg for their leadership and vision in addressing this major global health issue.”

Bloomberg’s reappointment comes at a critical juncture for public health. During the COVID-19 pandemic, people living with NCDs faced worse outcomes than those without. Today, Gallup released a new survey commissioned by WHO and Bloomberg Philanthropies that found most respondents in five surveyed countries – including Colombia, India, Jordan, the United Republic of Tanzania and the United States of America rank an NCD or NCD risk factor as the biggest health problem in their country.

The public’s awareness of the links between NCDs and their risk factors such, as tobacco and alcohol consumption, unhealthy diets, and lack of physical activity, is low. Yet, the majority of people surveyed across all countries support a wide number of proven interventions and policies that can reduce deaths from NCDs, such as incorporating more green spaces in urban health design and increasing taxes on tobacco.

“As we continue to respond to this pandemic and prepare for the next, we have seen the critical importance of addressing a major risk factor in COVID-19 hospitalizations and deaths – noncommunicable diseases,” said Michael R. Bloomberg, Founder of Bloomberg Philanthropies and WHO Global Ambassador for Noncommunicable Diseases and Injuries. “Noncommunicable diseases such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, chronic lung disease, and cancer are the world’s biggest silent killers – but they can often be prevented with investment in proven, cost-effective interventions. I look forward to continuing to make life-saving investments in NCD and injury prevention alongside Dr Tedros and the WHO.”

As WHO Global Ambassador, Bloomberg will continue to support global, national, and local efforts to protect people from NCDs and injuries. This work also advances the 2030 UN Sustainable Development Goal (SDG 3.4) target to reduce the global number of NCD deaths by one-third through high-impact, population-level policies and programmes implemented in cities across the world.

NCDs cause nearly three-quarters of deaths worldwide. Every year, 17 million people under the age of 70 die of NCDs, 86 percent of whom live in low- and middle-income countries. The COVID-19 pandemic further exacerbated the NCD burden by delaying and disrupting care, and in the early months of the pandemic, 75 percent of countries reported disruption to essential NCD services because of lockdown restrictions and channelling of resources. While every Member State of the United Nations has committed to reducing premature death from NCDs by one-third by 2030 – an effort that could save millions of lives – few countries are currently on track to achieve it. Urgent global efforts are needed to get back on track to reach Sustainable Development Goal targets and reduce premature deaths from NCDs.

[1] The Heads of State and Government Group launched a Global Compact on NCDs in April 2022 in Accra, Ghana at the International Strategic Dialogue on NCDs.

About the World Health Organization

The World Health Organization provides global leadership in public health within the United Nations system. Founded in 1948, WHO works with 194 Member States, across six regions and from more than 150 offices, to promote health, keep the world safe and serve the vulnerable. By connecting countries, people and partners, we strive to give everyone, everywhere an equal chance at a safe and healthy life.

About Michael Bloomberg’s work in public health

An international leader on public health issues, Bloomberg’s investments in public health include major, life-saving initiatives to reduce tobacco and youth e-cigarette use through over $1 billion in investments, support healthy food policy, reduce drowning, and improve road safety and maternal health, among others. In 2016, he launched the American Health Initiative at Johns Hopkins University to tackle declining life expectancy in the United States, and in 2017, started the Partnership for Healthy Cities, a global network of 70 cities committed to reducing noncommunicable diseases and injuries. Recently, Bloomberg Philanthropies invested an additional $115 million in global public health nonprofit Resolve to Save Lives – bringing its total investment to $215 million – to continue preventing deaths from heart disease.

About Bloomberg Philanthropies

Bloomberg Philanthropies invests in 941 cities and 173 countries around the world to ensure better, longer lives for the greatest number of people. The organization focuses on five key areas for creating lasting change: the Arts, Education, Environment, Government Innovation, and Public Health.

Bloomberg Philanthropies encompasses all of Michael R. Bloomberg’s giving, including his foundation, corporate, and personal philanthropy as well as Bloomberg Associates, a pro bono consultancy that works in cities around the world. In 2021, Bloomberg Philanthropies distributed $1.66 billion. For more information, please visit bloomberg.org




I am deeply concerned about the potential for a second disaster in Pakistan: a wave of disease and death following this catastrophe, linked to climate change, that has severely impacted vital health systems leaving millions vulnerable. The water supply is disrupted, forcing people to drink unsafe water, which can spread cholera and other diarrhoeal diseases. Standing water enables mosquitoes to breed and spread vector- borne diseases such as malaria and dengue. Health centres have been flooded, their supplies damaged, and people have moved away from home which makes it harder for them to access their normal health services. All this means more unsafe births, more untreated diabetes or heart disease, and more children missing vaccination, to name but a few of the impacts on health.

But if we act quickly to protect health and deliver essential health services, we can significantly reduce the impact of this impending crisis. Health workers in Pakistan are stretched to the limit as they do all they can to deliver critical services amid the destruction. Nearly 2000 health facilities have been fully or partially damaged. Together with the government of Pakistan, UN and NGO partners, WHO is setting up temporary health facilities and medical camps and helping to re-supply medicines to other health centres. We are increasing disease surveillance so outbreaks can be detected early and people can get the treatment they need.

Government and partners are providing safe drinking water and access to toilets to lower the risks of disease from dirty water. WHO has provided water purification kits and oral rehydration salts to manage diarrhoeal diseases. Partners are also helping ensure safer housing and bed nets to protect against mosquitoes and the diseases they carry.

WHO immediately released US$10 million from the WHO Contingency Fund for Emergencies which enabled us to deliver essential medicines and other supplies.

I thank the donors for their prompt response to the flash appeal. We continue to assess the scale of the crisis and will issue a revised appeal shortly. I urge donors to continue to respond generously so that, together, we can save lives and prevent more suffering.
Globally, half of all preventable harm in medical care is medication related, a quarter of which is severe or life-threatening. In the lead up to World Patient Safety Day on 17 September 2022, WHO is emphasizing the global burden of medication harm. The elderly population is one of the most at-risk groups of medication harm, especially those taking multiple medications. High rates of medication-related harm are also seen in surgical care, intensive care and emergency medicine.

“Medicines are powerful tools for protecting health. But medicines that are wrongly prescribed, taken incorrectly or are of poor quality, can cause serious harm,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “Nobody should be harmed while seeking care.”

Unsafe medication practices and medication errors are one of the main causes of injury and avoidable harm in health-care systems across the world. The global cost associated with medication errors has been estimated at US$42 billion annually. Medication errors happen due to systemic issues and/or human factors such as fatigue, poor environmental conditions or staff shortages which affect prescribing, transcribing, dispensing, administration and monitoring practices. These errors can result in severe harm, disability and even death.

World Patient Safety Day aims to increase understanding among and engagement of the public and encourage countries to promote safety in health care. This year has a particular focus on medication safety with the slogan ‘Medication Without Harm’. The campaign will also see the consolidation of the ongoing WHO Global Patient Safety Challenge: Medication Without Harm, with the aim of reducing avoidable medication-related harm globally.

WHO is advocating for urgent improvement in strategies to reduce medication-related harm in key risk areas. Furthermore, it is working with partners to develop a set of medication safety technical resources, including a policy brief and medication safety solutions such as medication safety for look-alike sound-alike (LASA) medicines. LASA medicines may look or sound similar to each other, either by their generic name, or brand name. They might have similar packaging, similar-sounding names, or similar spellings.

Flaws in the systems for prescription are a big contributor to medication-related harm, alongside human error. Evidence has shown that more than half of all medication harm occurs at the stage when medicines are prescribed and when they are being taken by patients due to inadequate monitoring. The highest risk category for medication-related harm is antibiotics, but medicines such as sedatives, anti-inflammatories and heart and blood pressure medication also pose significant risks.

WHO is calling on stakeholders to continue efforts to reduce medication-related harm, develop strategies and structures to improve medication safety at local, national, regional and global levels, and make a pledge to adopt the Medication Without Harm Challenge.

Note to editors



World Patient Safety Day was established by the World Health Assembly (resolution WHA72.6) in 2019, with the aim of increasing public awareness and engagement, enhancing global understanding, and working towards global solidarity and action by countries and partners to promote safety in health care. Each year a theme is selected to shed light on a priority area critical to patient safety. World Patient Safety Day 2022 has been dedicated to Medication Safety.
WHO welcomes the overarching recommendations of The Lancet COVID-19 Commission’s report on “Lessons for the future from the COVID-19 pandemic,” which align with our commitment to stronger global, regional and national pandemic preparedness, prevention, readiness and response. At the same time, there are several key omissions and misinterpretations in the report, not least regarding the public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) and the speed and scope of WHO’s actions.

WHO welcomes the Commission’s endorsement of a pandemic agreement, strengthening the International Health Regulations (IHR), and enhancing financing. These issues are core to the vision of WHO Director-General, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, as distilled in the five priorities for his second term. WHO and its Member States are already enacting these recommendations. The World Health Assembly agreed a historic decision in May 2022 to sustainably finance WHO.This year will see two rounds of public hearings for a pandemic accord take place.

The Commission strongly endorses WHO’s central role in global health, arguing that “WHO should be strengthened” and that reforms “should include a substantial increase of its core budget.”

WHO echoes the Commission’s conclusions that COVID-19 exposed major global challenges, such as chronic under financing of the UN, rigid intellectual property regimes, a lack of sustainable financing for low- and middle-income countries, and “excessive nationalism,” which drove vaccine inequity.

The Organization also agrees with the focus on biosafety, as shown by the formalization of our Technical Advisory Group on biosafety, the publication of our Laboratory biosafety manual – now in its 4th edition – and the publication on 13 September this year of a life sciences framework to help mitigate bio risks and safely govern dual-use research.

WHO places similar emphasis on the importance of multilateralism, solidarity and cooperation when facing pandemics. We also welcome the recognition of the key role that countries themselves play.

Many of the Commission’s recommendations align with those received over the past two years from review bodies set up by WHO itself, such as the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response (IPPPR), the Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee for the WHO Health Emergencies Programme (IOAC) and the IHR Review Committee, as well as assessments from other entities. As we are a learning organization, we established a dashboard of recommendations from these initiatives and others to track their implementation by WHO and others.

WHO’s rapid response

The Commission does not, however, convey the full arc of WHO’s immediate, multi-year, life-saving response, detailed below:

On 30 December 2019, WHO received the first alerts of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause in Wuhan, China, and notified the IHR focal point, seeking further information from Chinese health authorities the next day.

On 1 January 2020, WHO activated its Incident Management System to manage daily action. The team, which includes focal points on clinical care, infection prevention and control, diagnostics, logistics, communications and more, met daily throughout 2020, into 2021 and continues to meet this year.

On 5 January 2020, WHO issued a global alert to all Member States through a formal IHR system – the Event Information System – based on our initial risk assessment of the situation in China. This alerted Member States and advised them to take measures to identify cases, care for patients, and prevent infection and onward human-to-human transmission for acute respiratory pathogens with epidemic and pandemic potential. This was WHO’s first global warning to take concrete measures for an unknown respiratory disease. WHO has consistently driven knowledge-sharing through dedicated briefings for countries, during which the critical experiences of early-affected countries were shared and the elements of WHO’s comprehensive response were outlined.

On 9 January 2020, WHO convened the first of many teleconferences with established global expert networks, to discuss all available information on the cluster reported from China. These networks enabled the real-time exchange of direct knowledge, experience and early study findings, which fed directly into WHO’s early advice and recommendations.

Between 10 and 12 January 2020, WHO published a comprehensive package of technical guidance for countries. This package covered how to test for a high threat respiratory coronavirus, treat patients for severe acute respiratory infection, inform the public to prevent infection and human- to-human transmission, and to prepare health systems to deal with more cases.

On 13 January 2020, WHO published the first protocol to develop PCR tests to identify cases based on the release of the full genome sequence two days earlier. By 2 February 2020, WHO began shipping validated PCR assays to countries around the world.

On 22 and 23 January 2020, when there were nine cases and no deaths reported outside China, the Director-General convened the Emergency Committee (EC) under the IHR to meet, and advise whether the event constituted a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC). The Committee advised that it did not. The Director-General said publicly: “Make no mistake. This is an emergency in China, but it has not yet become a global health emergency. It may yet become one”.

The Committee advised that it did not. The Director-General said publicly: “Make no mistake. This is an emergency in China, but it has not yet become a global health emergency. It may yet become one”. From 27 to 28 January, following the EC, the Director-General and senior staff travelled to China to meet with top government officials, gather information about the outbreak and seek cooperation.

On 30 January 2020, when there were 98 reported cases (and no deaths) in 18 countries outside China, the Director-General reconvened the Emergency Committee. It advised that the outbreak constituted a PHEIC. The DG took their advice and declared a PHEIC, issuing temporary recommendations for how countries could further prepare and respond.

On 4 February 2020, WHO’s Strategic Preparedness and Response Plan (SPRP) was published. It outlined comprehensive measures all countries needed to take to suppress transmission and save lives, using a package of interventions including early identification and isolation and care of cases, contact tracing and supported quarantine, use of medical masks, distancing, ventilation, infection prevention and control in health facilities, taking a risk-based approach to small and large gatherings, and for travel.

Following regular media briefings held in January, daily briefings began on 5 February 2020. Media briefings continue on a weekly basis, alongside regular live social media conversations with senior WHO experts, demonstrating the priority placed on communicating with leaders and the public.

From 11 to 12 February 2020, WHO led a Global Research and Innovation Forum on the new virus, convening nearly 900 experts and funders from more than 40 countries, to take stock of what was known about the novel coronavirus and to set the agenda going forward. A follow-up achievement was WHO’s Solidarity trial, which became one of the largest clinical trials for COVID-19 therapeutics, involving more than 30 countries, over 14 000 patients and nearly 500 hospitals at its peak.

A comprehensive and detailed list of actions taken by WHO during the COVID-19 response can be viewed in our interactive timeline.

From day one and to this day, WHO, together with our global expert networks and guideline development groups, regularly updates our guidance and strategies with the latest knowledge about the virus, including updates to the SPRP and the COVID-19 global vaccination strategy, and to the 11th version of WHO’s living guideline on COVID-19 therapeutics, which was published in July 2022.

WHO played, and continues to play, a vital role in getting COVID-19 tools to countries in need, not least through joint endeavours such as the ACT-Accelerator, Pandemic Supply Chain Network (PSCN) and UN COVID-19 Supply Chain Task Force. Lab testing capability in African nations rose dramatically over six months, thanks to support from WHO. Only two countries on the African continent had COVID-19 testing capacities at the start of 2020; by mid-year, all 54 countries had them. WHO has supported 18 countries globally to set up plants for medical oxygen.

Throughout the pandemic, the Director-General has repeatedly called for leaders to take actions to protect people and share tools equitably when addressing the world’s most important fora, such as the February Munich Security Conference; the extraordinary G20 Leaders Summit of March 2020; the G7 Summit of June 2021, where the 70% vaccination target was announced; and Global COVID-19 Summits co-hosted by the Biden Administration in September 2021 and May 2022.

Regarding the areas of WHO’s response focused on by the Commission, WHO would like also to highlight the many day-to-day steps, including the following:

WHO repeatedly warned of the potential of asymptomatic human-to-human transmission , particularly pre-symptomatic transmission, including in late January in updated surveillance guidance, in protocols for enhanced surveillance on 29 January (defining a contact as someone with exposure 1 day before symptom onset of a case) and 4 February (changing a contact to someone with exposure up to 4 days before symptom onset of a case), at its Executive Board on 4 February, in guidance documents from 23 and 28 February 2020, in its China mission report and media briefings. WHO issued guidance and enhanced surveillance protocols early in the pandemic to identify contacts among people prior to the development of symptoms.

, particularly pre-symptomatic transmission, including in late January in updated surveillance guidance, in protocols for enhanced surveillance on 29 January (defining a and 4 February (changing a contact to someone with exposure up to 4 days before symptom onset of a case), at its Executive Board on 4 February, in guidance documents from 23 and 28 February 2020, in its China mission report and media briefings. WHO issued guidance and enhanced surveillance protocols early in the pandemic to identify contacts among people prior to the development of symptoms. The IHR recognize the sovereign rights of State Parties to introduce restrictions on travel . From the very beginning of the COVID-19 response, WHO recommended many measures countries should take, including screening at entry points.

. From the very beginning of the COVID-19 response, WHO recommended many measures countries should take, including screening at entry points. At the beginning of the pandemic, dramatic global supply constraints saw health workers around the world scrambling to find basic supplies to protect themselves. WHO’s early priority was getting access to masks for those most at-risk around the world; we initially recommended the use of medical masks for anyone with symptoms, anyone caring for someone sick, and frontline health workers. Our logisticians and other UN partners were central in activating the pandemic supply chain and increasing global supplies.

for those most at-risk around the world; we initially recommended the use of medical masks for anyone with symptoms, anyone caring for someone sick, and frontline health workers. Our logisticians and other UN partners were central in activating the pandemic supply chain and increasing global supplies. WHO guidance published on 10 January 2020, outlined respiratory precautions – including airborne precautions – in health-care settings. WHO guidance addressing many forms of transmission including zoonotic, droplet, airborne, short- and long-range aerosol, fomite, and vertical transmission, along with specific recommendations to prevent such transmission in different settings (such as health facilities, schools, workplaces), was updated and expanded regularly throughout the pandemic based on emerging evidence. WHO is leading and coordinating a multi-agency, multidisciplinary, international technical consultation process to discuss and reach a consensus on pathogens that transmit through the air, with a wide range of global experts and international and national agencies.

Looking ahead

The pandemic is not over, though the end is in sight, and WHO continues its response, while laying a stronger foundation for the future:
The World Health Summit and WHO jointly invite to the world’s leading global health conference. This year's Summit will take place from 16-18 October 2022 in Berlin, Germany, and will bring together the most prominent names in global health from all sectors in all regions of the world: heads of state and government ministers, scientists, and representatives from the private sector as well as civil society.

Patrons are German Federal Chancellor Olaf Scholz, French President Emmanuel Macron, and WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.

WHS 2022 aims to set the course for a healthier, more equitable future. Central topics include climate change and health, pandemic preparedness, digital transformation, and sustainable health systems.

See more information about the programme and the confirmed speakers.

The World Health Summit is open to the press, but places for journalists on-site are limited. Digital participation requires no accreditation, links will be available shortly before WHS 2022 at www.worldhealthsummit.org

Journalists can apply for on-site participation until Wednesday, 12 October 2022 here.



For media inquiries, follow https://www.worldhealthsummit.org/whs-2022/media-center.html

More information available here.
WHO is aware of an increasing number of reports regarding COVID-19 immunization errors in children.



The immunization errors have been reported through the passive vaccine safety surveillance systems and included in the media in a number of countries. On 19 May 2022, the US Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) presented data showing that half of all non-serious adverse events following Pfizer BNT162b2 immunization in children aged 5-11 years submitted to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) surveillance system through 24 April 2022 included an event associated with immunization error (1). The Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) also reported instances of immunization errors among 5–11-year-olds and made recommendations to reinforce the use of the paediatric version of the Comirnaty (Pfizer) vaccine which comes in a vial with an orange top(2).

According to the WHO global database of individual case safety reports (VigiBase data as of 10 July 2022), about 24% of all case safety reports in children after COVID-19 immunizations are related to immunization errors. The types of immunization errors include the use of adult dose in children, use in inappropriate age groups, underdose, overdose, use of unapproved COVID-19 vaccines, inappropriate scheduling between doses, preparation errors such as omitting a diluent before immunization, administering a COVID-19 vaccine instead of another vaccine, failure to adhere to requisite storage conditions and use of expired doses. Immunization errors have been reported with Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Sinovac, Novavax and other COVID-19 vaccines.



Although in very rare instances serious adverse events have been documented after immunization against COVID-19 disease, none of these were verified to be related to immunization errors of any kind. Children who received an incorrect dose of a COVID-19 vaccine or who received an inappropriately prepared vaccine have only reported expected adverse events like a sore arm, headache, and fever.



However, given the increasing number of reports of immunization errors in children, WHO would like to remind healthcare providers to be alert when storing, preparing, and administering COVID-19 vaccines. National immunization programs and relevant stakeholders should implement risk minimization activities to reduce the occurrence of immunization errors, including procedures to check the date of birth and current age of the child. Vaccine providers should have access to clear instructions for vaccine administration, including visual aids, and vaccine vials should be clearly labelled(3). Training for healthcare providers involved in COVID-19 immunization of children should be reinforced.



If a immunization error does occur, healthcare providers should immediately inform individuals and/or their guardians as well as report the incident to the relevant local vaccine safety surveillance system or immunization programme. Children who have received an incorrect dose or an incorrectly prepared vaccine should be monitored for any adverse events. Some countries have also prepared guidance on what to do with subsequent doses if an error in administration occurs(4).

WHO will continue to consult the Global Advisory Committee on Vaccine Safety (GACVS) and other relevant experts as well as WHO advisory committees on the problem of immunization errors and will work closely with countries to manage potential risks, using science and data to drive response and recommendations.

(1)Shimabukuro T. COVID-19 vaccine safety updates: Primary series in children ages 5-11 years. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 19 May 2022 (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/slides-2022-05-19.html )

(2)Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) COVID-19 vaccine weekly safety report - 10-02-2022. 10 February 2022 (https://www.tga.gov.au/periodic/covid-19-vaccine-weekly-safety-report-10-02-2022)

(3)Examples of practical guides on use of COVID-19 vaccines in children:

COVID Vaccine Dosing_Quick Reference by American Academy of Pediatrics (https://downloads.aap.org/AAP/PDF/COVID%20Vaccine%20Dosing_Quick%20Reference.pdf?_ga=2.233317982.1540468903.1657898439-1537646742.1653333380)

COVID-19 Vaccine Interim COVID-19 Immunization Schedule for 6 Months of Age and Older by US CDC (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-19/downloads/COVID-19-immunization-schedule-ages-6months-older.pdf)

(4)Examples of guidance on what to do with subsequent doses if an error in administration occurs:
The World Health Organization (WHO) has published its first guideline for Ebola virus disease therapeutics, with new strong recommendations for the use of two monoclonal antibodies. WHO calls on the global community to increase access to these lifesaving medicines.



Ebola is a severe and too often fatal illness caused by the Ebola virus. Previous Ebola outbreaks and responses have shown that early diagnosis and treatment with optimized supportive care – with fluid and electrolyte repletion and treatment of symptoms – significantly improve survival. Now, following a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials of therapeutics for the disease, WHO has made strong recommendations for two monoclonal antibody treatments: mAb114 (Ansuvimab; Ebanga) and REGN-EB3 (Inmazeb).



Developed according to WHO standards and methods for guidelines, and published simultaneously in English and French, the guidelines will support health care providers caring for patients with Ebola, and policymakers involved in outbreak preparedness and response. The clinical trials were conducted during Ebola outbreaks, with the largest trial conducted in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, demonstrating that the highest level of scientific rigour can be applied even during Ebola outbreaks in difficult contexts.



The new guidance complements clinical care guidance that outlines the optimized supportive care Ebola patients should receive, from the relevant tests to administer, to managing pain, nutrition and co-infections, and other approaches that put the patient on the best path to recovery.



“This therapeutic guide is a critical tool to fight Ebola,” said Dr Richard Kojan, co-chair of the Guideline Development Group of experts selected by WHO and President of ALIMA, The Alliance for International Medical Action. “It will help reassure the communities, health care workers and patients, that this life-threatening disease can be treated thanks to effective drugs. From now on, people infected with the Ebola virus will have a greater chance of recovering if they seek care as early as possible. As with other infectious diseases, timeliness is key, and people should not hesitate to consult health workers as quickly as possible to ensure they receive the best care possible.”



The two recommended therapeutics have demonstrated clear benefits and therefore can be used for all patients confirmed positive for Ebola virus disease, including older people, pregnant and breastfeeding women, children and newborns born to mothers with confirmed Ebola within the first 7 days after birth. Patients should receive recommended neutralizing monoclonal antibodies as soon as possible after laboratory confirmation of diagnosis.



There is also a recommendation on therapeutics that should not be used to treat patients: these include ZMapp and remdesivir.



All these recommendations only apply to Ebola virus disease caused by Ebola virus (EBOV; Zaire ebolavirus).



“Advances in supportive care and therapeutics over the past decade have revolutionized the treatment of Ebola. Ebola virus disease used to be perceived as a near certain killer. However, that is no longer the case,” said Dr Robert Fowler, University of Toronto, Canada, and co-chair of the guideline development group. “Provision of best supportive medical care to patients, combined with monoclonal antibody treatment – MAb114 or REGN-EB3 – now leads to recovery for the vast majority of people.”

Access to both these treatments remains challenging, especially in resource-poor areas. These drugs should be where patients need them the most: where there is an active Ebola outbreak, or where the threat of outbreaks is high or very likely. WHO is ready to support countries, manufacturers and partners to improve access to these treatments, and to support national and global efforts to increase affordability of biotherapeutics and their corresponding similar biotherapeutic products, WHO published the first invitation to manufacturers of therapeutics against Ebola virus disease to share their drugs for evaluation by the WHO Prequalification Unit, a crucial step to improve drug access for communities and countries affected by Ebola.



“We have seen incredible advances in both the quality and safety of clinical care during Ebola outbreaks,” said Dr Janet Diaz, lead of the clinical management unit in WHO’s Health Emergencies programme. “Doing the basics well, including early diagnosis, providing optimized supportive care with the evaluation of new therapeutics under clinical trials, has transformed what is possible during Ebola outbreaks. This is what has led to development of a new standard of care for patients. However, timely access to these lifesaving interventions has to be a priority.”



Although WHO was able to make strong recommendations for the use of two therapeutics, there is a need for further research and evaluation of clinical interventions, as many uncertainties remain. Further improvements could be made in supportive care, and in our understanding and characterization of Ebola virus disease and its longer-term consequences, and to ensure continued inclusion of vulnerable populations (pregnant women, newborns, children and older people) in future research.
A group of global experts convened by WHO has agreed on new names for monkeypox virus variants, as part of ongoing efforts to align the names of the monkeypox disease, virus and variants – or clades – with current best practices. The experts agreed to name the clades using Roman numerals.

The monkeypox virus was named upon first discovery in 1958, before current best practices in naming diseases and viruses were adopted. Similarly for the name of the disease it causes. Major variants were identified by the geographic regions where they were known to circulate.

Current best practice is that newly-identified viruses, related disease, and virus variants should be given names with the aim to avoid causing offense to any cultural, social, national, regional, professional, or ethnic groups, and minimize any negative impact on trade, travel, tourism or animal welfare.

Disease: Assigning new names to existing diseases is the responsibility of WHO under the International Classification of Diseases and the WHO Family of International Health Related Classifications (WHO-FIC). WHO is holding an open consultation for a new disease name for monkeypox. Anyone wishing to propose new names can do so here (see ICD-11, Add proposals).

Virus: The naming of virus species is the responsibility of the International Committee on the Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV), which has a process underway for the name of the monkeypox virus.

Variants/clades: The naming of variants for existing pathogens is normally the result of debate amongst scientists. In order to expedite agreement in the context of the current outbreak, WHO convened an ad hoc meeting on 8 August to enable virologists and public health experts to reach consensus on new terminology.

Experts in pox virology, evolutionary biology and representatives of research institutes from across the globe reviewed the phylogeny and nomenclature of known and new monkeypox virus variants or clades. They discussed the characteristics and evolution of monkeypox virus variants, their apparent phylogenetic and clinical differences, and potential consequences for public health and future virological and evolutionary research.

The group reached consensus on new nomenclature for the virus clades that is in line with best practices. They agreed on how the virus clades should be recorded and classified on genome sequence repository sites.

Consensus was reached to now refer to the former Congo Basin (Central African) clade as Clade one (I) and the former West African clade as Clade two (II). Additionally, it was agreed that the Clade II consists of two subclades.

The proper naming structure will be represented by a Roman numeral for the clade and a lower-case alphanumeric character for the subclades. Thus, the new naming convention comprises Clade I, Clade IIa and Clade IIb, with the latter referring primarily to the group of variants largely circulating in the 2022 global outbreak. The naming of lineages will be as proposed by scientists as the outbreak evolves. Experts will be reconvened as needed.

The new names for the clades should go into effect immediately while work continues on the disease and virus names.
This document was first published on 24 November 2021 and was updated on 11 August 2022.



WHO, with the support of the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization and its COVID-19 Vaccines Working Group, is reviewing the emerging evidence on the need for and timing of vaccinating children and adolescents with the currently available COVID-19 vaccines, which have received Emergency Use Listing (EUL). SAGE is continuously reviewing the literature and has reached out to vaccine manufacturers, the research community and Member States to obtain the most complete and recent data on this issue. This interim statement was developed with additional support from the Strategic and Technical Advisory Group of Experts (STAGE) on maternal, newborn, child, and adolescent health, and nutrition.



This interim statement is not a policy recommendation. It examines the role of COVID-19 vaccines in children and adolescents in the global context of inequitable vaccine distribution and access across countries at a time when many countries have not yet achieved high vaccine coverage rates in the highest and high priority-use groups.



Background

The greatest burden of disease in terms of severe disease and deaths remains among older persons and those with comorbidities. This evidence informed the WHO Prioritization Roadmap, which identifies high priority-use groups according to vaccine supplies available to countries(1). WHO recognizes that various countries are in different pandemic phases with different vaccination coverage rates.

Significant progress has been made on the vaccination front: nearly every country has

implemented COVID-19 vaccination and over 12 billion doses have been administered globally, resulting in WHO Member States reaching on average 60% of their populations(2). This massive and unprecedented COVID-19 vaccine deployment has led to major reductions in severe disease, hospitalization and deaths (so-called de-coupling of cases and deaths), allowing societies to re-open and averting an estimated 19.8 million deaths in 2021. Continued use of currently licensed vaccines based on the index virus confers high levels of protection against severe disease for all variants.

However, global disparities in vaccination continue; and many countries have not yet achieved high vaccine coverage of the most at-risk populations. Specifically, only 25% of older populations have received a complete primary series of COVID-19 vaccines in lower income countries, the very places where healthcare access is more limited(2).

The updated WHO global vaccination strategy targets 100% coverage for all older adults and health workers(2). Furthermore, countries should strive towards broader population immunity, measured as progress against the global target of 70% of the total national population, and against context-specific country targets. This acknowledges that countries will determine the breadth of their COVID-19 national vaccination programmes considering factors such as: local COVID-19 epidemiology, demographics, opportunities to leverage COVID-19 to strengthen primary health care systems, other health priorities, socio-economic risks from future waves of disease, population demand for breadth of vaccination, and sustainability of vaccination efforts.

There are currently no vaccine supply constraints. Although the majority of COVID-19 vaccines are only approved for use in adults aged 18 years and above, an increasing number of vaccines are now also being authorized for use in children. Some countries have given emergency use authorization for mRNA vaccines (Pfizer-BioNTech BNT162b2 and Moderna mRNA-1273) for use in the age groups of 6 months and above. Trials in children as young as age 3 years were completed for two inactivated vaccines (Sinovac-CoronaVac and BBIBP-CorV) and these products were approved by Chinese authorities for the age indication of 3-17 years. Although COVID-19 vaccines such as CoronaVac, Novavax and BBIBP-CorV have received EUL for adults, they have not yet received WHO EUL for the use in children. Covaxin, an adjuvanted inactivated vaccine developed by Bharat, was approved in India for the age indication of 12-17 years; but has not yet received WHO EUL for this age indication. Several other COVID-19 vaccines, not yet emergency use listed by WHO, have obtained paediatric age indication in various countries.



Burden of disease in children and adolescents



SARS-CoV-2 typically causes less severe illness and fewer deaths in children and adolescents compared to adults. Nonetheless, children and adolescents remain susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection and may transmit the virus to others, with the risk of both infection and transmission increasing with age(3). The risk of transmission to and from children also depends on the level of community transmission, the public health and social measures implemented to control the virus as well as biological factors related to the virus itself (i.e., the type of variant circulating).



During the initial pandemic phase with the ancestral strain, age-disaggregated cases reported to WHO, covering the time period from 30 December 2019 to 25 October 2021(4) show that children under five years of age represent 2% (1 890 756) of reported global cases and 0.1% (1 797) of reported global deaths. Older children and younger adolescents (5 to 14 years) account for 7% (7 058 748) of reported global cases and 0.1% (1 328) of reported global deaths while older adolescents and young adults (15 to 24 years) represent 15% (14 819 320) of reported global cases and 0.4% (7 023) of reported global deaths. Deaths for all those aged under 25 years represented less than 0.5% of reported global deaths.



Reported COVID-19 cases among children spiked dramatically in 2022 during the Omicron variant surge at a time when most countries relaxed public health and social measures. For example, in the United States, by July 2022, 14,003,497 cases in children were reported, and children represented 18.6% (14,003,497/75,463,921) of all reported cases, with an overall rate of 18,605 cases per 100,000 children in the population(5). Globally, by 24 July 2022, children below the age of 5 years and those aged 5-14 years presented 2.47% and 10.44% respectively(6). Adolescents and young adults aged 15 to 24 years presented 13.91% of all cases. Children aged 5 years and below account for 0.11% of all global deaths, while children aged 5 to 14 years accounted for 0.089% and adolescents and young adults 0.37% of all globally reported deaths(6).



Milder symptoms and asymptomatic presentations may mean less frequent care seeking in these groups, thus children and adolescents tend to be tested less and cases may go unreported. An age-dependent risk of severe disease with those under one year of age experiencing more severe disease has been suggested(7, 8) with neonates (infants in the first 28 days of life) and premature infants at higher risk of severe COVID-19, although several reviews show that neonates tend to have mild disease when compared with other paediatric patients(9, 10). It is important to note that children under the age of five years have a higher risk of other diseases with clinical presentations that overlap with COVID-19, such as pneumonia and other viral upper respiratory tract infections, which may lead to misclassification. Additionally, age disaggregation has not been systematically provided in the literature, and the results of these studies are context-specific depending on factors such as timing within the pandemic and an emphasis on hospitalized patients(8).

Children and adolescents can experience prolonged clinical symptoms (known as “long COVID-19”, post COVID-19 condition(11), or post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection), however, the frequency and characteristics of these conditions are still under investigation, and to date they appear to be less frequent compared to adults. Additionally, a hyperinflammatory syndrome, although rare, has been reported to occur world-wide and complicates recovery from COVID-19(12, 13). This is referred to as paediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with SARS-CoV-2 (PIMS-TS) in Europe and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) in North America(14).

Several risk factors for severe COVID-19 in children have been reported, including older age, obesity, and preexisting conditions. The preexisting conditions associated with higher risk of severe COVID-19 include type 2 diabetes, severe asthma, heart and pulmonary diseases, seizure disorders and other neurologic disorders, neurodevelopmental (e.g. Down Syndrome) and neuromuscular conditions(15), and moderate to severe immunocompromising conditions.

The most substantive evidence on the risk of severe COVID-19 and death in children and adolescents comes from studies in high resource settings, so the generalizability of the following observations to lower resource settings remains to be determined. One systematic review suggests that there may be larger impact of paediatric COVID-19 related fatality in low to middle income countries versus high income countries (16).

The role of children and adolescents in transmission of SARS-CoV-2

Outbreaks of COVID-19 have been identified in secondary schools, summer camps and day care centres, particularly when neither physical distancing nor masks were used to reduce transmission risks. There is some preliminary evidence that younger children may be less infectious, as measured by secondary attack rates, than adolescents and adults(17). Data on the global incidence of COVID-19 suggest adolescents test positive for SARS-CoV-2 at a higher proportion than younger children, however seroprevalence surveys are required to provide more conclusive information on infection rates.

Children who become infected with SARS-CoV-2 shed the virus in their respiratory tract and also in their faeces(18). Amongst individuals positive for SARS-CoV-2 who were tested at the same time point after symptom onset, levels of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA shedding in the respiratory tract appeared similar in children, adolescents, and adults(19). The relationship between age, viral load, and transmission across the full symptom spectrum of SARS-CoV-2 infection has not been comprehensively investigated because people with no, or mild symptoms are seldom tested systematically. The relative transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 at different ages remains uncertain, largely due to the challenges involved in disentangling the influences of biological, host, virus, variants of concern, and environmental factors(20).

Persistence of anti–SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain IgG was investigated in a household cohort study in Italy. Even following asymptomatic infections, antibodies persisted until 12 months after infection in all age groups, showing significant higher antibody peaks for younger individuals at every follow-up time point. Children younger than 3 years were found to develop higher levels of binding antibodies compared with adults older than 18 years(21).

Socio-economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and pandemic response on children and adolescents



Despite their lower risk of severe COVID-19 disease, children and adolescents have been disproportionately affected by COVID-19 control measures. The most important indirect effects are related to school closures which have disrupted the provision of educational services and increased emotional distress and mental health problems(22). When unable to attend school and socially isolated, children are more prone to maltreatment, sexual violence, adolescent pregnancy, and child marriage, all of which increase the probability of missing further education and of poor pregnancy outcomes.



A range of follow-on effects of school closures occur. These include disruption in physical activity and routines and loss of access to a wide range of school-provided services such as school meals, health, nutrition, water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) and services targeted to children with special needs such as learning support, speech therapy and social skills training. Children not attending school face enhanced risks of cyberbullying from other children, and the potential for predatory behavior from adults related to spending more time online.



Longer-term, prolonged school closures lead to education loss and exacerbation of pre-existing inequalities. It is estimated that 24 million children were at risk of not returning to school owing to the pandemic(23); those affected have been estimated to incur a US$10 trillion loss in lifetime earnings (24). At a societal level, the economic devastation wrought by COVID-19 may take years to overcome, exacerbating economic inequalities, poverty, unemployment, household financial insecurity, food insecurity, and malnutrition, all of which negatively impact children, often disproportionately.



Routine immunization services have also been negatively affected as a result of the pandemic response, thereby exacerbating the potential resurgence of vaccine-preventable diseases such as measles, tetanus, yellow fever, HPV, and others(25). The COVID-19 pandemic caused the largest backslide in immunizations in the past three decades(26); about 23 million children missed their routine childhood vaccinations.



Safety of COVID-19 vaccines in adolescents and children:



In Phase 2/3 trials for both mRNA vaccines, efficacy and immunogenicity were similar or higher compared to adults; safety and reactogenicity profiles in adolescents were similar to young adults. During the Phase 3 trials in young children aged 6 months to 5 years no safety signal was identified, but the sample size was too small to identify rare events.

In post-introduction studies and real-world experience, a very rare serious adverse event was reported: myocarditis/pericarditis. Cases of myocarditis/pericarditis occurred more often in younger men (16-24 years of age) and after the second dose of the vaccine compared to older adults and also children. These cases of myocarditis and pericarditis typically occurred within a few days after vaccination, are generally mild, respond to conservative treatment, and are less severe with better outcomes than classical myocarditis or COVID-19 related myocarditis. The risk of myocarditis/pericarditis associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection is higher than the risk after vaccination(27). In October 2021, the Global Advisory Committee on Vaccine Safety (GACVS) concluded that in all age groups the benefits of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines in reducing hospitalizations and deaths due to COVID-19 outweigh the risks.

The risk of Thrombosis with Thrombocytopenia Syndrome (TTS) following adenoviral-vector vaccines, although overall low, was higher in younger adults compared to older adults, but no data are available on the risk below the age of 18 years(28).

Post-introduction effectiveness data of COVID-19 vaccines in children and adolescents

Here we only present data for vaccines which have received WHO EUL in children and/or adolescents.

In Israel, during the Omicron dominant period, the estimated vaccine effectiveness (VE) of BNT162b2 against symptomatic COVID19 was 18% (95% CI, −2 to 34) at 14 to 27 days after the first dose and 48% (95% CI, 29 to 63) at 7 to 21 days after the second dose. There was a trend toward higher VE in the youngest age group (5 or 6 years of age) than in the oldest age group (10 or 11 years of age) (29).

In the United States, during the period of Omicron predominance, COVID-19–associated hospitalization rates in children aged 5–11 years were studied in the COVID-19-Associated Hospitalization Surveillance Network. The cumulative hospitalization rate during the Omicron-predominant period was 2.1 times as high among unvaccinated children (19.1 per 100,000 population) as among vaccinated children (9.2). Non-Hispanic Black children represented the largest group of unvaccinated children. Thirty percent of hospitalized children had no underlying medical conditions, and 19% were admitted to an intensive care unit. Children with diabetes and obesity were more likely to experience severe COVID-19(30).

The effectiveness of 2 doses of BNT162b2 vaccine received >28 days before hospital admission in preventing MIS-C was assessed using a test-negative case-control design among hospitalized patients aged 12-18 years during the Delta variant predominance. Patients with MIS-C (case-patients) and two groups of hospitalized controls matched to case-patients were evaluated. Among 102 MIS-C case-patients and 181 hospitalized controls, estimated effectiveness of 2 doses of BNT162b2 vaccine against MIS-C was 91% (95% CI = 78%-97%). All 38 MIS-C patients requiring life support were unvaccinated. Receipt of 2 doses of the BNT162b2 vaccine is associated with a high level of protection against MIS-C in persons aged 12-18 years(31).

Leveraging a population-based cohort in Chile of 490,694 children aged 3-5 years, administering a two-dose schedule, 28 days apart, of Sinovac CoronaVac VE was 38% (95% confidence interval (CI), 37-40) against symptomatic COVID-19, 65% (95% CI, 50-75) against hospitalization and 69% (95% CI, 19-88) against ICU admission(32).

The vaccine impact on transmission within households prior to the emergence of Delta was reported to be about 50% (33). However, the impact of vaccination on reducing transmission in the context of the more transmissible delta variant appears to be lower(34) and even lower for Omicron.



COVID-19 in comparison with influenza

In the United States, in the setting of extensive mitigation measures during the COVID-19 pandemic, the annual COVID-19-associated hospitalization rate during 2020-2021 was higher among adolescents and similar or lower among children <12 years old compared with influenza during the three seasons before the COVID-19 pandemic(35). In children 0-4 years (COVID-19: 25.0 per 100,000), and 5-11 years (COVID-19: 66.8 per 100,000), the rate of hospitalization is similar for COVID-19 and influenza while the rate of hospitalization in those aged 12-17 years is higher for COVID-19 (COVID-19: 59.9 per 100,000; Influenza: 12.2-14.1 per 100,000). Among hospitalized children, 22% with influenza and 26% with COVID-19 required ICU admission. More data to compare COVID-19 with influenza are needed beyond the United States.



Considerations for vaccinating adolescents and children

COVID-19 vaccines with WHO EUL that have undergone clinical trials in children and adolescent are safe and effective in preventing disease in children and adolescents. Children with comorbidities and severe immunocompromising conditions should be offered vaccination(36).

Although benefit-risk assessments clearly underpin the benefit of vaccinating all age groups, including children and adolescents to reduce the number of infections, hospitalizations, deaths and long-COVID , the direct health benefit of vaccinating healthy children and adolescents is lower compared with vaccinating older adults due to the lower incidence of severe COVID-19 and deaths in younger persons. As children and adolescents tend to have milder disease compared to adults, unless they are in a group at higher risk of severe COVID-19, it is less urgent to vaccinate them than older people, and those with chronic health conditions and health workers.

However, there are benefits of vaccinating children and adolescents that go beyond the direct health benefits. Minimizing disruptions to education for children and maintenance of their overall well-being, health and safety are important considerations. Vaccination that decreases SARS-CoV-2 transmission in this age group may reduce transmission from children and adolescents to older adults, and may help reduce the need for mitigation measures in schools. However, during the current Omicron dominant period, vaccine impact on transmission is only modest and short-lived.



Countries’ strategies related to COVID-19 control should facilitate children’s participation in education and other aspects of social life, and minimize school closures, even without vaccinating children and adolescents (37). UNICEF and WHO have developed guidance on how to minimize transmission in schools and keep schools open, regardless of vaccination of school-aged children(38). Teachers, family members, and other adult contacts of children and adolescents should ideally all be vaccinated for direct protection.



Countries should consider the individual and population benefits of immunizing children and adolescents in their specific epidemiological and social context when developing their COVID-19 immunization policies and programs.

Aligned and coordinated action is needed to achieve the global COVID-19 vaccination targets. The decision to vaccinate adolescents and children must account for prioritization to fully protect the highest risk subgroups through primary vaccination series, and as vaccine effectiveness declines with time since vaccination, through booster doses. As such, before considering implementing primary vaccination series in adolescents and children, attaining high coverage of primary series - and booster doses as needed based on evidence of waning and optimizing vaccination impact - in highest and high priority-use groups, such as older adults, must be pursued(39). Furthermore, it is of utmost importance for children to continue to receive the recommended childhood vaccines for other infectious diseases.



References:


The health and lives of people in the greater Horn of Africa are threatened as the region faces an unprecedented food crisis. In order to carry out urgent, life-saving work, WHO is today launching a funding appeal for US$ 123.7 million.

Over 80 million people in the 7 countries spanning the region – Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan and Uganda – are estimated to be food insecure, with upwards of 37.5 million people classified as being in IPC phase 3, a stage of crisis where people have to sell their possessions in order to feed themselves and their families, and where malnutrition is rife.

Driven by conflict, changes in climate and the COVID-19 pandemic, this region has become a hunger hotspot with disastrous consequences for the health and lives of its people.

“Hunger is a direct threat to the health and survival of millions of people in the greater Horn of Africa, but it also weakens the body’s defences and opens the door to disease,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “WHO is looking to the international community to support our work on the ground responding to this dual threat, providing treatment for malnourished people, and defending them against infectious diseases.”

The funds will go towards urgent measures to protect lives, including shoring up the capacity of countries to detect and respond to disease outbreaks, procuring and ensuring the supply of life-saving medicines and equipment, identifying and filling gaps in health care provisions, and providing treatment to sick and severely malnourished children.

With the upcoming rainy season expected to fail, the situation is worsening. There are already reports of avoidable deaths among children and women in childbirth. The risk of trauma and injuries is high as violence, including gender-based violence, is on the rise. There are outbreaks of measles in 6 of the 7 countries, against a background of low vaccination coverage. Countries are simultaneously fighting cholera and meningitis outbreaks as hygiene conditions have deteriorated, with clean water becoming scarce and people leaving home on foot to find food, water and pasture for their animals.

The region already has an estimated 4.2 million refugees and asylum seekers, with this number expected to increase as more people are forced to leave their homes. When on the road, communities find it harder to access health care, a service already in short supply following years of underinvestment and conflict.

“Ensuring people have enough to eat is central. Ensuring that they have safe water is central. But in situations like these, access to basic health services is also central,” said Dr Michael Ryan, Executive Director of WHO’s Health Emergencies Programme. “Services like therapeutic feeding programmes, primary health care, immunization, safe deliveries and mother and child services can be the difference between life and death for those caught up in these awful circumstances.”

WHO has already released US$ 16.5 million from its Contingency Fund for Emergencies to ensure people have access to health services, to treat sick children with severe malnutrition and to prevent, detect and respond to infectious disease outbreaks.

WHO thanks its donors who make it possible to carry out this life-saving work.
As global crises continue to threaten the health and nutrition of millions of babies and children, the vital importance of breastfeeding as the best possible start in life is more critical than ever.

This World Breastfeeding Week, under its theme Step up for breastfeeding: Educate and Support, UNICEF and WHO are calling on governments to allocate increased resources to protect, promote and support breastfeeding policies and programmes, especially for the most vulnerable families living in emergency settings.

During emergencies, including those in Afghanistan, Ukraine, Yemen, the Horn of Africa, and the Sahel, breastfeeding guarantees a safe, nutritious and accessible food source for babies and young children. It offers a powerful line of defense against disease and all forms of child malnutrition, including wasting.



Breastfeeding also acts as a baby’s first vaccine, protecting them from common childhood illnesses.



Yet the emotional distress, physical exhaustion, lack of space and privacy, and poor sanitation experienced by mothers in emergency settings mean that many babies are missing out on the benefits of breastfeeding to help them survive.



Fewer than half of all newborn babies are breastfed in the first hour of life, leaving them more vulnerable to disease and death. And only 44% of infants are exclusively breastfed in the first 6 months of life, short of the World Health Assembly target of 50% by 2025.



Protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding is more important than ever, not just for protecting our planet as the ultimate natural, sustainable, first food system, but also for the survival, growth and development of millions of infants.



That is why UNICEF and WHO are calling on governments, donors, civil society and the private sector to step up efforts to:



prioritize investing in breastfeeding support policies and programmes, especially in fragile and food insecure contexts;

equip health and nutrition workers in facilities and communities with the skills they need to provide quality counselling and practical support to mothers to successfully breastfeed;

protect caregivers and health-care workers from the unethical marketing influence of the formula industry by fully adopting and implementing the International Code of Marketing of Breast-Milk Substitutes, including in humanitarian settings; and

implement family-friendly policies that provide mothers with the time, space and support they need to breastfeed.

About UNICEF

UNICEF works in some of the world’s toughest places, to reach the world’s most disadvantaged children. Across more than 190 countries and territories, we work for every child, everywhere, to build a better world for everyone.

For more information about UNICEF and its work for children visit www.unicef.org

About WHO



The World Health Organization provides global leadership in public health within the United Nations system. Founded in 1948, WHO works with 194 Member States, across 6 regions and from 149 offices, to promote health, keep the world safe and serve the vulnerable. Our goal for 2019–2023 is to ensure that a billion more people have universal health coverage, to protect a billion more people from health emergencies, and provide a further billion people with better health and well-being.
WHO welcomes the announcement of a new voluntary licensing agreement for patents relating to long acting-cabotegravir (CAB-LA) between ViiV Healthcare and the Medicine Patent Pool. This agreement will give selected generic manufacturers the opportunity to develop, manufacture and supply generic versions of CAB-LA in 90 low- and middle-income countries, subject to required regulatory approvals. This is a critical step to support long-term access in the least developed, low-income and lower middle-income countries around the world, including countries in sub-Saharan African.

On the back of WHO’s new guidelines on CAB-LA, which recommend CAB-LA administered by injection once every two months, as a safe and effective alternative to oral PrEP, WHO applauds VIiV and MPP for providing a pathway to supporting this important new prevention option to people at substantial risk of HIV infection.

WHO guidelines also suggest that the use of expensive molecular testing, as stipulated by ViiV, which will further limit feasibility and access in low- and middle-income countries, is not a prerequisite. It proposes countries should be able to consider testing approaches which support effective use in their contexts.

The majority of people who could benefit from HIV prevention option live in low- and middle-income countries and 70% of new HIV infection are in people from key populations where access to effective prevention is often limited. WHO is aware that generic manufacturing will likely take time to set up and so it is important for ViiV to quickly announce a price that ensures CAB-LA is available outside high-income countries so that countries and health systems can prepare for implementation. Furthermore, it will be important to outline how upper middle-income countries not included in the ViiV and MPP agreement will be able to access the medicines at an affordable price.

WHO also welcomes the announcement of a new coalition of partners led by WHO, Unitaid, UNAIDS, the Global Fund and AVAC, which is collectively bringing together communities and funders to unlock access and believes there is an immediate need and opportunity to support the delivery of the effective new PrEP option. CAB-LA implementation is urgently needed to understand how people will choose between PrEP choices, where and how CAB-LA should be delivered for greatest acceptability and impact and to resolve some of the outstanding delivery issues.
WHO today released new guidelines for the use of long-acting injectable cabotegravir (CAB-LA) as pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV and called for countries to consider this safe and highly effective prevention option for people at substantial risk of HIV infection.

The guidelines, released ahead of the 24th International AIDS Conference (AIDS 2022), will support countries as they plan for CAB-LA introduction as part of a comprehensive approach to HIV prevention and will facilitate urgently needed operational research.



The guidelines are launched at a critical moment, as HIV prevention efforts have stalled with 1.5 million new HIV infections in 2021 – the same as 2020. There were 4000 new infections every day in 2021, with key populations (sex workers, men who have sex with men, people who inject drugs, people in prisons and transgender people) and their sexual partners accounting for 70% of HIV infections globally.



“Long-acting cabotegravir is a safe and highly effective HIV prevention tool, but isn’t yet available outside study settings,” said Dr Meg Doherty, Director of WHO’s Global HIV, Hepatitis and Sexually Transmitted Infections Programmes. “We hope these new guidelines will help accelerate country efforts to start to plan and deliver CAB-LA alongside other HIV prevention options, including oral PrEP and the dapivirine vaginal ring.”



CAB-LA is an intramuscular injectable, long-acting form of PrEP, with the first 2 injections administered 4 weeks apart, followed thereafter by an injection every 8 weeks. CAB-LA was shown to be safe and highly effective among cisgender women, cisgender men who have sex with men, and transgender women who have sex with men in 2 randomized controlled trials, HPTN 083 and HPTN 084. Together, these landmark studies found that use of CAB-LA resulted in a 79% relative reduction in HIV risk compared with oral PrEP, where adherence to taking daily oral medication was often a challenge. Long-acting injectable products have also been found to be acceptable and sometimes preferred in studies examining community PrEP preferences.



Today’s press conference also marks the launch of a new coalition to accelerate global access to CAB-LA. Convened by WHO, Unitaid, UNAIDS and The Global Fund, the coalition will identify market interventions needed to advance near- and long-term access to CAB-LA, establish financing and procurement for the drug, provide implementation support to global HIV prevention programs and issue policy guidance, among other activities.



“To achieve UN prevention goals, we must push for rapid, equitable access to all effective prevention tools, including long-acting PrEP,” said Rachel Baggaley, Lead of the Testing, Prevention and Populations Team at Global HIV, Hepatitis and STI Programmes at WHO. “That means overcoming critical barriers in low- and middle-income countries, including implementation challenges and costs.”



WHO will continue to support evidence-based strategies to increase PrEP access and uptake, including through the adoption of CAB-LA. Key actions include:

WHO will support countries and partners to include CAB-LA safely and effectively in HIV prevention programmes.

WHO is working with Unitaid and other partners to develop implementation science projects to answer outstanding safety issues, implementation challenges, and understand people's preferences for CAB-LA among other HIV prevention choices.

WHO is working with countries, communities and donors including The Global Fund, PEPFAR, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to support the inclusion of CAB-LA in their programmes and to catalyze implementation science and monitoring of programmes so that CAB-LA can be implemented, safely and effectively, for greatest impact.

The WHO Global PrEP Network will host webinars this year on CAB-LA to provide up-to-date information for countries, communities and implementers and increase awareness.

In April 2022, CAB-LA was added to WHO’s list of Expressions of Interest for evaluation for prequalification, and WHO is working with countries on regulatory approval.

Both oral PrEP and CAB-LA are highly effective. WHO will continue to support prevention choices. CAB-LA increases the options available and should always be offered alongside oral PrEP. Some people may continue to choose oral PrEP and CAB-LA will likely be preferred by people who find it difficult to take tablets or do not want to do so. WHO has also released new guidance on Differentiated and simplified PrEP at the AIDS 2022 conference to support easier access, including community delivery.

Consistent with previous WHO guidelines, the new CAB-LA guidelines are based on a public health approach that considers effectiveness, acceptability, feasibility and resource needs across a variety of settings. The guidelines are designed to facilitate CAB-LA delivery and the operational research which is urgently needed to address implementation and safety issues. These will inform decisions on how to successfully provide and scale up CAB-LA. The guidelines highlight critical research gaps, including issues relating to HIV drug resistance, HIV testing, service delivery models, resource requirements, safety in pregnancy and breastfeeding, and provision of CAB-LA in geographies and for populations not included in the trials.

The guidelines also note that young people and key populations often experience challenges in accessing current PrEP services. Communities must be involved in developing and delivering HIV prevention services that are effective, acceptable and support choice.
Today, the World Health Organization (WHO) issued a call for people around the world to “do one thing” to prevent drowning. As one of the leading causes of death globally for children and young people ages 1–24, and the third leading cause of injury-related deaths overall, drowning tragically claims more than 236 000 lives each year. To galvanize action and mark World Drowning Prevention Day, the Jet d’Eau in Geneva will be illuminated in blue this evening, accompanied by similar actions in other cities around the world.

––

More than 90% of drowning deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries, with children under the age of 5 being at highest risk. These deaths are frequently linked to daily, routine activities, such as bathing, collecting water for domestic use, travelling over water on boats or ferries, and fishing. The impacts of seasonal or extreme weather events – including monsoons – are also a frequent cause of drowning and these impacts are largely preventable through a number of interventions.

“Every year, around the world, hundreds of thousands of people drown. Most of these deaths are preventable through evidence-based, low-cost solutions,” said WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. “Today, cities around the world are lighting up their monuments in blue light as a call to action for each of us to do our part to prevent drowning. Let’s put a stop to drowning.”

“Drowning is a global public health challenge, and at Bloomberg Philanthropies, we’re focused on implementing solutions to prevent it. Today, we’re joining our partners around the world in recognizing World Drowning Prevention Day and taking action,” said Michael R. Bloomberg, founder of Bloomberg Philanthropies and WHO Global Ambassador for Noncommunicable Diseases and Injuries. “In many cases, we know what works to prevent drowning. We’ve developed tools and guidance to help governments implement solutions – and if we do more together, we really can save thousands of lives.”

WHO recommends 6 evidence-based measures to prevent drowning, including installing barriers controlling access to water; training bystanders in safe rescue and resuscitation; teaching school-aged children basic swimming and water safety skills; providing supervised day care for children; setting and enforcing safe boating, shipping and ferry regulations; and improving flood risk management.

This year, the theme of World Drowning Prevention Day invites the global community to “do one thing” to prevent drowning. Examples of actions that can be taken are as follows:

Individuals can share drowning prevention and water safety advice with their families, friends and colleagues, sign up for swimming or water safety lessons, or support local drowning prevention charities and groups.

can share drowning prevention and water safety advice with their families, friends and colleagues, sign up for swimming or water safety lessons, or support local drowning prevention charities and groups. Groups can host public events to share water safety information, launch water safety campaigns, or commit to developing or delivering new drowning prevention programmes using recommended best practice interventions.

can host public events to share water safety information, launch water safety campaigns, or commit to developing or delivering new drowning prevention programmes using recommended best practice interventions. Governments can develop or announce new drowning prevention policies, strategies, legislation or investment, convene multisectoral roundtables or parliamentary discussions on drowning burden and solutions, and introduce or commit to supporting drowning prevention programming domestically or internationally.

Many countries in the world have committed to drowning prevention programmes. Bangladesh has started a 3-year program to reduce drowning among children throughout the country. As part of the program, the government will take over the 2500 daycares established and funded by Bloomberg Philanthropies since 2012, and will expand the program by adding an additional 5500 daycares to provide supervision to 200 000 children ages 1–5 years.

Notes to Editors:

WHO works with partners including Bloomberg Philanthropies, the Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI) and the Global Health Advocacy Incubator as well as other UN agencies to raise awareness on drowning prevention.

Together, we are supporting Member States to design and implement drowning prevention initiatives based on published guidance documents. With Bloomberg Philanthropies’ support, Bangladesh and Vietnam have identified and scaled up cost-effective approaches to drowning prevention among children, and Ghana and Uganda are receiving support to study the circumstances of drowning.



WHO has published a growing library of drowning prevention assessments and guidance documents. The 2014 Global Report on Downing: Preventing a leading killer. In May 2022, WHO published its latest guidance on best practice recommendations for three of these interventions: the provision of day-care for children, basic swimming and water safety skills, and safe rescue and resuscitation training.

The Bloomberg Philanthropies Initiative to Prevent Drowning supports drowning-prevention activities in Bangladesh, Uganda and Viet Nam, including supervision of young children in daycare, survival swimming instruction to children ages 6–15, and enhanced data collection.



In 2021, the first UN General Assembly resolution was adopted on drowning prevention. The resolution asks WHO to coordinate drowning prevention actions within the UN System and lead preparations for World Drowning Prevention Day.



Global virtual webinar event:

To mark World Drowning Prevention Day 2022, WHO and international partners will host a global virtual webinar event on 27 July (12:00 – 13:30 CEST), to discuss approaches to working across the UN system to prevent drowning and showcase the “one thing” partners from around the world have committed to for preventing drowning in their communities. https://who.zoom.us/meeting/register/tJ0ldeiorzMpG9EQR-6AlBABlSQKCWQhUZ9w
The WHO Director-General is hereby transmitting the Report of the second meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR) Emergency Committee regarding the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox, held on Thursday, 21 July 2022, from 12:00 to 19:00 CEST.

The WHO Director-General expresses his sincere gratitude to the Chair, Members, and Advisors for their careful consideration of the issues regarding this outbreak, as well as for providing invaluable input for his consideration. The Committee Members did not reach a consensus regarding their advice on determination of a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) for this event.

The WHO Director-General recognizes the complexities and uncertainties associated with this public health event. Having considered the views of Committee Members and Advisors as well as other factors in line with the International Health Regulations, the Director-General has determined that the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox constitutes a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.

The WHO Director-General also considered the views of the Committee in issuing the set of Temporary Recommendations presented below.



===

Temporary Recommendations issued by the WHO Director-General in relation to the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox



These Temporary Recommendations apply to different groups of States Parties, based on their epidemiological situation, patterns of transmission and capacities. Each State Party, at any given point in time, falls either under Group 1 or under Group 2. Some State Parties may also fall under Group 3 and/or Group 4.

All Temporary Recommendations are expected to be implemented in full respect of established principles of human rights, inclusion and the dignity of all individuals and communities.

Group 1: States Parties, with no history of monkeypox in the human population or not having detected a case of monkeypox for over 21 days

1.a. Activate or establish health and multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms to strengthen all aspects of readiness for responding to monkeypox and stop human to human transmission.

1.b. Plan for, and/or implement, interventions to avoid the stigmatization and discrimination against any individual or population group that may be affected by monkeypox, with the goal of preventing further undetected transmission of monkeypox virus. The focus of these interventions should be: to promote voluntary self-reporting and care seeking behaviour; to facilitate timely access to quality clinical care; to protect the human rights, privacy and dignity of affected individuals and their contacts across all communities.

1.c. Establish and intensify epidemiological disease surveillance, including access to reliable, affordable and accurate diagnostic tests, for illness compatible with monkeypox as part of existing national surveillance systems. For disease surveillance purposes, case definitions for suspected, probable and confirmed cases of monkeypox should be adopted.

1.d. Intensify the detection capacity by raising awareness and training health workers, including those in primary care, genitourinary and sexual health clinics, urgent care/emergency departments, dental practices, dermatology, paediatrics, HIV services, infectious diseases, maternity services, obstetrics and gynaecology, and other acute care facilities.

1.e. Raise awareness about monkeypox virus transmission, related prevention and protective measures, and symptoms and signs of monkeypox among communities that are currently affected elsewhere in this multi-country outbreak (e.g., importantly, but not exclusively, gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (MSM) or individuals with multiple sexual partners) as well as among other population groups that may be at risk (e.g., sex workers, transgender people).

1.f. Engage key community-based groups, sexual health and civil society networks to increase the provision of reliable and factual information about monkeypox and its potential transmission to and within populations or communities that may be at increased risk of infection.

1.g. Focus risk communication and community support efforts on settings and venues where intimate encounters take place (e.g., gatherings focused on MSM, sex-on-premises venues). This includes engaging with and supporting the organizers of large and smaller scale events, as well as with owners and managers of sex on premises venues to promote personal protective measures and risk-reducing behaviour.

1.h. Immediately report to WHO, through channels established under the provision of the IHR, probable and confirmed cases of monkeypox, including using the minimum data set contained in the WHO Case Report Form (CRF).

1.i. Implement all actions necessary so as to be ready to apply or continue applying the set of Temporary Recommendations enumerated for Group 2 below in the event of first-time or renewed detection of one or more suspected, probable or confirmed cases of monkeypox.



Group 2: States Parties, with recently imported cases of monkeypox in the human population and/or otherwise experiencing human-to-human transmission of monkeypox virus, including in key population groups and communities at high risk of exposure

2.a. Implementing coordinated response

2.a.i. Implement response actions with the goal of stopping human-to-human transmission of monkeypox virus, with a priority focus on communities at high risk of exposure, which may differ according to context and include gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (MSM). Those actions include: targeted risk communication and community engagement, case detection, supported isolation of cases and treatment, contact tracing, and targeted immunization for persons at high risk of exposure for monkeypox.

2.a.ii. Empower affected communities and enable and support their leadership in devising, contributing actively to, and monitoring the response to the health risk they are confronting. Extend technical, financial and human resources to the extent possible and maintain mutual accountability on the actions of the affected communities.

2.a.iii. Implement response actions with the goal of protecting vulnerable groups (immunosuppressed individuals, children, pregnant women) who may be at risk of severe monkeypox disease. Those actions include: targeted risk communication and community engagement, case detection, supported isolation of cases and treatment, contact tracing. These may also include targeted immunization which takes into careful consideration the risks and benefits for the individual in a shared clinical decision-making.

2.b. Engaging and protecting communities

2.b.i. Raise awareness about monkeypox virus transmission, actions to reduce the risk of onward transmission to others and clinical presentation in communities affected by the outbreak, which may vary by context, and promote the uptake and appropriate use of prevention measures and adoption of informed risk mitigation measures. In different contexts this would include limiting skin to skin contact or other forms of close contact with others while symptomatic, may include promoting the reduction of the number of sexual partners where relevant including with respect to events with venues for sex on premises, use of personal protective measures and practices, including during, and related to, small or large gatherings of communities at high risk of exposure.

2.b.ii Engage with organizers of gatherings (large and small), including those likely to be conducive for encounters of intimate sexual nature or that may include venues for sex-on-premises, to promote personal protective measures and behaviours, encourage organizers to apply a risk-based approach to the holding of such events and discuss the possibility of postponing events for which risk measures cannot be put in place. All necessary information should be provided for risk communication on personal choices and for infection prevention and control including regular cleaning of event venues and premises.

2.b.iii. Develop and target risk communication and community engagement interventions, including on the basis of systematic social listening (e.g., through digital platforms) for emerging perceptions, concerns, and spreading of misinformation that might hamper response actions.

2.b.iv. Engage with representatives of affected communities, non-government organizations, elected officials and civil society, and behavioural scientists to advise on approaches and strategies to avoid the stigmatization of any individual or population groups in the implementation of appropriate interventions, so that care seeking behaviour, testing and access to preventive measures and clinical care is timely, and to prevent undetected transmission of monkeypox virus.



2.c. Surveillance and public health measures

2.c.i. Intensify surveillance for illness compatible with monkeypox as part of existing national surveillance schemes, including access to reliable, affordable and accurate diagnostic tests.

2.c.ii. Report to WHO, on a weekly basis and through channels established under the provision of the IHR, probable and confirmed cases of monkeypox, including using the minimum data set contained in the WHO Case Report Form (CRF).

2.c.iii. Strengthen laboratory capacity, and international specimens referral capacities as needed, for the diagnosis of monkeypox virus infection, and related surveillance, based on the use of nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT), such as real time or conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR).

2.c.iv. Strengthen genomic sequencing capacities, and international specimens referral capacities as needed, building on existing sequencing capacities worldwide, to determine circulating virus clades and their evolution, and share genetic sequence data through publicly accessible databases.

2.c.v. Isolate cases for the duration of the infectious period. Policies related to the isolation of cases should encompass health, psychological, material and essential support to adequate living. Any adjustment of isolation policies late in the isolation period would entail the mitigation of any residual public health risk.

2.c.vi. During the isolation period, cases should be advised on how to minimise the risk of onward transmission.

2.c.vii. Conduct contact tracing among individuals in contact with anyone who may be a suspected, probable, or confirmed case of monkeypox, including: contact identification (protected by confidentiality), management, and follow-up for 21 days through health monitoring which may be self-directed or supported by public health officers. Policies related to the management of contacts should encompass health, psychological, material and essential support to adequate living.

2.c.viii. Consider the targeted use of second- or third-generation smallpox or monkeypox vaccines (hereafter referred to as vaccine(s)) for post-exposure prophylaxis in contacts, including household, sexual and other contacts of community cases and health workers where there may have been a breach of personal protective equipment (PPE).

2.c.ix. Consider the targeted use of vaccines for pre-exposure prophylaxis in persons at risk of exposure; this may include health workers at high risk of exposure, laboratory personnel working with orthopoxviruses, clinical laboratory personnel performing diagnostic testing for monkeypox and communities at high risk of exposure or with high risk behaviours, such as persons who have multiple sexual partners.

2.c.x. Convene the National Immunization Technical Advisory Group (NITAG) for any decision about immunization policy and the use of vaccines. These should be informed by risks-benefits analysis. In all circumstances, vaccinees should be informed of the time required for protective immunity potentially offered by vaccination to be effective.

2.c.xi. Engage the communities at high risk of exposure in the decision-making process regarding any vaccine roll out.

2.d. Clinical management and infection prevention and control

2.d.i. Establish and use recommended clinical care pathways and protocols for the screening, triage, isolation, testing, and clinical assessment of suspected cases of persons with monkeypox; provide training to health care providers accordingly, and monitor the implementation of those protocols.

2.d.ii. Establish and implement protocols related to infection prevention and control (IPC) measures, encompassing engineering and administrative and the use of PPE; provide training to health care providers accordingly, and monitor the implementation of those protocols.

2.d.iii Provide health and laboratory workers with adequate PPE, as appropriate for health facility and laboratory settings, and provide all personnel with training in the use of PPE.

2.d.iv. Establish, update, and implement clinical care protocols for management of patients with uncomplicated monkeypox disease (e.g., keeping lesions clean, pain control, and maintaining adequate hydration and nutrition); with severe symptoms; acute complications; as well as for the monitoring and management of mid- or long-term sequelae.

2.d.v. Harmonise data collection and report clinical outcomes, using the WHO Global Clinical Platform for Monkeypox.

2.e. Medical countermeasures research

2.e.i. Make all efforts to use existing or new vaccines against monkeypox within a framework of collaborative clinical efficacy studies, using standardized design methods and data collection tools for clinical and outcome data, to rapidly increase evidence generation on efficacy and safety, collect data on effectiveness of vaccines (e.g., such as comparison of one or two dose vaccine regimens), and conduct vaccine effectiveness studies.

2.e.ii. Make all efforts to use existing or new therapeutics and antiviral agents for the treatment of monkeypox cases within a framework of collaborative clinical efficacy studies, using standardized design methods and data collection tools for clinical and outcome data, to rapidly increase evidence generation on efficacy and safety.

2.e.iii. When the use of vaccines and antivirals for monkeypox in the context of a collaborative research framework is not possible, use under expanded access protocols can be considered, such as the Monitored Emergency Use of Unregistered and Investigational Interventions (MEURI), under certain circumstances, using harmonized data collection for clinical outcomes (such as the WHO Global Clinical Platform for Monkeypox).

2.f. International travel

2.f.i. Adopt and apply the following measures:

Any individual: With signs and symptoms compatible with monkeypox virus infection; or being considered a suspect, probable, or confirmed case of monkeypox by jurisdictional health authorities; or Who has been identified as a contact of a monkeypox case and, therefore, is subject to health monitoring,

should avoid undertaking any travel, including international, until they are determined as no longer constituting a public health risk. Exemptions include any individual who need to undertake travel to seek urgent medical care or flee from life-threatening situations, such as conflict or natural disasters; and contacts for whom pre-departure arrangements to ensure the continuity of health monitoring are agreed upon by sub-national health authorities concerned, or, in the case of international travel, by national health authorities;

Cross-border workers, who are identified as contacts of a monkeypox case, and, hence, under health monitoring, can continue their routine daily activities provided that health monitoring is duly coordinated by the jurisdictional health authorities from both/all sides of the border.

2.f.ii. Establish operational channels between health authorities, transportation authorities, and conveyances and points of entry operators to:

Facilitate international contact tracing in relation to individuals who have developed signs and symptoms compatible with monkeypox virus infection during travel or upon return;

Provide communication materials at points of entry on signs and symptoms consistent with monkeypox; infection prevention and control; and on how to seek medical care at the place of destination;

WHO advises against any additional general or targeted international travel-related measures other than those specified in paragraphs 2.f.i and 2.f.ii.



Group 3: States Parties, with known or suspected zoonotic transmission of monkeypox, including those where zoonotic transmission of monkeypox is known to occur or has been reported in the past, those where presence of monkeypoxvirus has been documented in any animal species, and those where infection of animal species in countries may be suspected including in newly affected countries

3.a. Establish or activate collaborative One Health coordination or other mechanisms at federal, national, subnational and/or local level, as relevant, between public health, veterinary, and wildlife authorities for understanding, monitoring and managing the risk of animal-to-human and human-to-animal transmission in natural habitats, forested and other wild or managed environments, wildlife reserves, domestic and peri-domestic settings, zoos, pet shops, animal shelters and any settings where animals may come into contact with domestic waste.

3.b. Undertake detailed case investigations and studies to characterize transmission patterns, including suspected or documented spillovers from, and spillback, to animals. In all settings, case investigation forms should be updated and adapted to elicit information on the full range of possible exposures and modes of both zoonotic and human-to-human transmission. Share the findings of these endeavours including ongoing case reporting with WHO.



Group 4: States Parties with manufacturing capacity for medical countermeasures

4.a. States Parties who have manufacturing capacity for smallpox and monkeypox diagnostics, vaccines or therapeutics should raise production and availability of medical countermeasures.

4.b. States Parties and manufacturers should work with WHO to ensure diagnostics, vaccines, therapeutics, and other necessary supplies are made available based on public health needs, solidarity and at reasonable cost to countries where they are most needed to support efforts to stop the onward spread of monkeypox.



Proceedings of the meeting

The second meeting of the IHR Emergency Committee on the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox was convened by Zoom, with the Chair and Vice-Chair being present in person on the premises of WHO headquarters, Geneva, Switzerland.

Members and Advisers joined by videoconference. Overall, 15 of the 16 Committee’s Members and all 10 Advisers to the Committee participated in the meeting.

The WHO Director-General welcomed the Committee, noting that he had reconvened them to assess the immediate and medium-term public health implications of the evolution of the multi-country monkeypox outbreak and provide their views on whether the event constitutes a public health emergency of international concern.

The WHO Director-General expressed concern about the number of cases, in an increasing number of countries, that have been reported to WHO and highlighted the challenges presented due to the complexity of transmission patterns in different Regions. He additionally stressed his awareness that determination of a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) involves the consideration of multiple factors, with the ultimate goal of protecting public health.

The Representative of the Office of Legal Counsel briefed the Members and Advisors on their roles and responsibilities and the mandate of the Emergency Committee under the relevant articles of the IHR.

The Ethics Officer from the Department of Compliance, Risk Management, and Ethics briefed Members and Advisers on their roles and responsibilities. Members and Advisers were also reminded of their duty of confidentiality as to the meeting discussions and the work of the Committee, as well as their individual responsibility to disclose to WHO, in a timely manner, any interests of a personal, professional, financial, intellectual or commercial nature that may give rise to a perceived or direct conflict of interest. Each Member and Adviser who was present was surveyed. No conflicts of interest were identified.

The meeting was handed over to the Chair of the Emergency Committee, Dr Jean-Marie Okwo-Bele who introduced the objectives of the meeting: to provide views to the WHO Director-General on whether the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox constitutes a PHEIC, and, if so, to review the proposed temporary recommendations to States Parties.



Presentations

The WHO Secretariat presented the global epidemiological situation, highlighting that between 1 January 2022 and 20 July 2022, 14,533 probable and laboratory-confirmed cases (including 3 deaths in Nigeria and 2 in the Central African Republic) were reported to WHO from 72 countries across all six WHO Regions; up from 3,040 cases in 47 countries at the beginning of May 2022.

Transmission is occurring in many countries that had not previously reported cases of monkeypox, and the highest numbers of cases are currently reported from countries in the WHO European Region and the Region of the Americas.

The majority of reported cases of monkeypox currently are in males, and most of these cases occur among males who identified themselves as gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (MSM), in urban areas, and are clustered in social and sexual networks. Early reports of children affected include a few with no known epidemiological link to other cases.

There has also been a significant rise in the number of cases in countries in West and Central Africa, with an apparent difference in the demographic profile maintained than that observed in Europe and the Americas, with more women and children amongst the cases.

Mathematical models estimate the basic reproduction number (R 0 ) to be above 1 in MSM populations, and below 1 in other settings. For example, in Spain, the estimated R0 is 1.8, in the United Kingdom 1.6, and in Portugal 1.4.

The clinical presentation of monkeypox occurring in outbreaks outside Africa is generally that of a self-limited disease, often atypical to cases described in previous outbreaks, with rash lesions localized to the genital, perineal/perianal or peri-oral area, that often do not spread further, and appears prior to the development of lymphadenopathy, fever, malaise, and pain associated with lesions.

The mean incubation period among cases reported is estimated at 7.6 to 9.2 days (based on surveillance data from the Netherlands, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (United Kingdom), and the United States of America (United States). The mean serial interval is estimated at 9.8 days (95% CI 5.9-21.4 day, based on 17 case-contact pairs in the United Kingdom).

A small number of cases have been reported among health workers. Investigations so far have not identified cases of occupational transmission, although investigations are ongoing.

The Secretariat noted that, although the number of cases and countries experiencing outbreaks of monkeypox appear to be rising, the WHO risk assessment has not changed since the first meeting of the Committee on 23 June 2022, and the risk is considered to be “moderate” at global level and in all six WHO Regions, except for European region, where it is considered to be “high”.

Modelling work conducted by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and the European Commission’s Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Authority (HERA) suggests that isolation of cases and contact tracing could be effective in bringing the outbreak under control. However, the operational experience gained to date in responding to this event, indicates that the implementation of such interventions in practice is extremely challenging – the identification of cases is hampered by barriers to access diagnostic testing; the isolation of cases for 21 days is difficult in the current COVID-19 pandemic-related post-lockdowns context; and contact tracing is difficult as contacts are often multiple and may be anonymous. The modelling by ECDC and HERA is suggesting that the addition of vaccination-related interventions can increase the chances of controlling the outbreak, with pre-exposure prophylaxis of individuals at high-risk of exposure appearing to be the most effective strategy to use vaccines when contact tracing is less effective, or impracticable. However, the limited data on vaccine effectiveness against monkeypox constitutes one of the limitations of the modelling work conducted. Additionally, the operationalization of such vaccination strategy presents challenges, including those related to vaccine access.

The genome sequence of the virus obtained in several countries shows some divergence from the West African clade. Work is ongoing to understand whether the observed genomic changes lead to phenotypic changes such as enhanced transmissibility, virulence, immune escape, resistance to antivirals, or reduced impact of countermeasures.

Although many species of animals are known to be susceptible to the monkeypox virus in the natural setting (e.g., rope squirrels, tree squirrels, Gambian pouched rats, dormice, non-human primates), there is the potential for spillback of the virus from humans to other susceptible animal species in different settings. To date, there is currently no documented evidence of instances of anthropozoonotic transmission available to the WHO Secretariat or its One Health partners the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH).

The WHO Secretariat also outlined the WHO response so far, and the ongoing work to develop the WHO Strategic Readiness and Response Plan for monkeypox, with its overall goal being to stop human-to-human transmission.

Representatives of Spain, the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada and Nigeria updated the Committee (in this order) on the epidemiological situation in their countries and their current response efforts. With the exception of Nigeria, the remaining four countries reported that 99% of cases were occurring in MSM, and mainly among those with multiple partners.

In Spain, cases have been decreasing over the past few weeks, but it is likely the data are incomplete because of delays in reporting. Most cases have been reported in major urban areas, with very few reports of cases among females and children who had epidemiological links to MSM. Pre-exposure prophylaxis with vaccination is being offered to health workers, contacts and people living with HIV, but vaccine supplies are low.

The United Kingdom reported on a few severe cases of monkeypox (including encephalitis), and it is also planning to modify its case definition for monkeypox, to include newly recognized conditions such as proctitis. Environmental investigations have identified monkeypox virus DNA (presumed to be infectious because of moderate Ct values) on surfaces in hospitals and households. The vaccine strategy is targeted and aims to interrupt transmission through post-exposure prophylaxis and pre-exposure prophylaxis among MSM at highest risk.

In the United States, cases of monkeypox are widely distributed across the country, although most cases are concentrated in three large cities. While a few cases have occurred in children and a pregnant woman, 99% are related to male-to-male sexual contact.

In Canada, 99% of cases have occurred among MSM, and the country is taking a broad approach to pre-exposure prophylaxis, given the challenges with contact tracing; and is strongly focused on engagement with community-led organizations supporting key affected populations groups.

Nigeria recorded a little over 800 cases of monkeypox between September 2017 and 10 July 2022 and has seen at 3% case fatality ratio among confirmed cases. Cases are predominantly in men aged 31 to 40 years; there was no evidence of sexual transmission presented. The highest number of annually reported cases since 2017 has been observed in 2022.

Following the presentations, the Committee Members and Advisers proceeded with a questions and answers session for both the Secretariat and the presenting countries.

The Committee continues to be concerned about a broad range of issues, including the following: the need for further understanding of transmission dynamics; the impact of the fear of stigma on health-seeking behaviour among MSM; the potential implications on rights-based delivery of care by Ministries of Health and other authorities; the challenges related to the use of public health and social measures to stop onward transmission, including isolation, access to testing and contact tracing, particularly because of multiple anonymous contacts; planned large local and international gatherings focused on MSM and associated public and private satellite events, conducive for increased opportunities for exposure through intimate sexual encounters and subsequent amplification of the outbreak; the need for continuous evaluation of interventions that may have an impact on transmission (e.g., one-dose versus two-dose vaccination regimens and vaccine effectiveness in general, given the apparent permucosal exposures that are causing infection in some cases); and the identification of key activities for targeted risk communications and community engagement, working in close partnership with affected communities, and providing the necessary support for community-led organizations to play their important role in the response to the outbreak.

There was particular concern about how vaccines and antivirals would be priced and distributed in the near future and made available in an equitable manner.



Deliberative session

The Committee reconvened in a closed meeting to examine the questions in relation to whether the event constitutes a PHEIC or not, and if so, to consider the Temporary Recommendations, drafted by the WHO Secretariat in accordance with IHR provisions.

At the request of the Chair, the WHO Secretariat reminded the Committee Members of their mandate and recalled the definition of a PHEIC under the IHR: an extraordinary event, which constitutes a public health risk to other States through international spread, and which potentially requires a coordinated international response.

The Committee reviewed evidence gathered by the Secretariat against the considerations proposed during its first meeting for re-assessing the outbreak. The Committee noted the generally moderate level of confidence in the available data to make any informed determination on these considerations.

Of the nine considerations put forward, based on currently available data, two of them have seen a significant change since the previous meeting – an increased number of countries reporting the first case(s) of monkeypox, and an increase of the number of cases in some West and Central African countries. There was evidence of a small increase of the overall growth rate associated with the outbreak. While cases among health workers have been reported, most reported community exposure. A limited number of cases among sex workers has been reported from case reports and social media listening. Secondary transmission to some children and women was reported. Limited transmission was reported to have been observed among vulnerable groups (immunosuppressed individuals, pregnant women, or children, although a small number of children were reported not to have an epidemiological link to another case. While cases experiencing severe pain continue to be reported, with some hospitalizations required to manage pain or secondary infection, and while clinical severity of cases overall remained generally unchanged since the previous meeting, a few severe cases, two ICU admissions and five deaths have been reported. At the present time, there is no data currently available about potential spillback from humans to animals. With regards to the potential changes in the virus genome, investigations are ongoing in relation to the reports of changes that may affect features of the virus. There has to date not been any reported circulation of the virus clade normally present in Central Africa outside of the usual settings.



Conclusions

Committee Members expressed a range of views on the considerations before them. They were unable to reach consensus regarding advice to the WHO Director-General on whether the multi-country outbreak of monkeypox should or should not be determined to constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Supportive elements regarding the views expressed by the Members of the Committee in favour or not in favour of such a determination are summarized below. Such views reflected:



Committee Members’ views in support of the prospective determination of a PHEIC

The multi-country outbreak of monkeypox meets all the three criteria defining a PHEIC contained in Article 1 of the Regulations ([...] an extraordinary event […] (i) constitut[ing] a public health risk to other States through the international spread of disease and (ii) which may potentially require a coordinated international response);

The moral duty to deploy all means and tools available to respond to the event, as highlighted by leaders of the LGBTI+ communities from several countries, bearing in mind that the community currently most affected outside Africa is the same initially reported to be affected in the early stages of HIV/AIDS pandemic;

The observed rising trends in the number of cases reported globally, in an increasing number of countries, and, yet, likely to reflect an underestimation of the actual magnitude of the outbreak(s);

The cases of monkeypox reported in children and pregnant women, which are reminiscent of the initial phases of the HIV pandemic;

Future waves of monkeypox cases are expected as the monkeypox virus is introduced in additional susceptible populations;

The modes of transmission sustaining the current outbreak are not fully understood;

The changes in the clinical presentation of cases of monkeypox currently observed with respect to the clinical picture known to date;

The need to generate further evidence related to the effectiveness of the use of both pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical measures in controlling the outbreak;

The significant morbidity associated with the monkeypox outbreak(s);

The potential future implications on public health and health services if the disease were to establish itself in the human population across the world, particularly for an orthopoxvirus causing human disease, as global immunity has greatly declined after smallpox was eradicated;

The perceived benefits associated with the prospective determination of a PHEIC include: Maintaining a heightened level of awareness and alert, which would increase the probability of stopping human-to-human transmission of monkeypox virus; Boosting political commitment towards response efforts; Increasing opportunities for funds to be released for response, and research purposes, as well as for the mitigation of the socioeconomic impact of the disease; Boosting international coordination of response efforts, in particular to secure equitable access to vaccines and antivirals; The possible stigmatization, marginalization, and discrimination that may result from the prospective determination of a PHEIC should not be regarded as deterrent to do so, and would need to be addressed.



Committee Members’ views NOT in support of the prospective determination of a PHEIC

The overall global risk assessment presented by the WHO Secretariat remained unchanged with respect to that presented to the Committee on 23 June 2022;

The greatest burden of the outbreak is currently reported in 12 countries in Europe and in the Americas, with no indications, based on currently available data, of an exponential increase in the number of cases in any of those countries, and early signs of stabilization or declining trends observed in some countries;

The vast majority of cases are observed among MSM with multiple partners, and, despite the operational challenges, there is the opportunity to stop ongoing transmission with interventions targeted to this segment of the population. Cases observed beyond this population group, including among health workers are, to date, limited;

The severity of the disease is perceived to be low;

The epidemic is gaining maturity, with future waves expected, and clearer indications about the effectiveness of policies and interventions are being generated;

The potential risks of hampering response efforts through the prospective determination of a PHEIC are perceived as outweighing the benefits of the latter for the following reasons: The stigma, marginalization, and discrimination that a determination of a PHEIC may generate against the currently affected communities, especially in countries where homosexuality is criminalized, LGBTI+ communities are not well established and engaged in a dialogue with governments. Communities in some countries have reportedly indicated that minimizing stigma associated with monkeypox – which unlike HIV infection may be a visible condition– requires developing novel approaches, which could be challenging in the context of a PHEIC; Action taken by the WHO Secretariat since May 2022 to raise the alert in relation to the unfolding monkeypox outbreak, including convening the Committee, appear to be effective, in triggering immediate response efforts in many countries in the northern hemisphere; Technical guidance issued by the Secretariat to inform national response efforts is regarded as adequate and comprehensive, with no identified impediments preventing its implementation worldwide; For West and Central African countries, where capacity building for surveillance, laboratory, and response is needed, the determination of a PHEIC may not be regarded as a tool for triggering nor for boosting such efforts; The determination of a PHEIC would unnecessarily and artificially increase the perception of the risk of the disease in the general public, which, in its turn, would translate into generating demand for vaccines, which should be used wisely; Not determining a PHEIC would not mean “business as usual”. The communication of the WHO Director-General decision would still be an opportunity to convey the needed continuity of the full range of necessary public health actions, beyond a mere high visibility determination.



Following the deliberations, Committee Members provided input to the proposed Temporary Recommendations previously outlined, should the WHO Director-General determine that the Multi-country outbreak of monkeypox constitutes a PHEIC.

===
The global COVID-19 vaccination rollout is the biggest and fastest in history but many of those at greatest risk remain unprotected – only 28% of older people and 37% of health care workers in low-income countries have received their primary course of vaccines and most have not received booster doses.

Health care workers, over 60s and other at-risk groups must be reached as priorities on the way to reaching the 70% coverage target.

WHO’s strategy update elevates the targets of vaccinating 100% of health care workers and 100% of the highest risk populations with both primary and booster doses, with the aim of reducing deaths, keeping societies open and ensuring economies function as transmission continues.

While vaccines have saved countless lives, they have not substantially reduced the spread of COVID-19. Innovation is needed to develop new vaccines that substantially reduce transmission, are easier to administer and give broader and longer-lasting protection.

WHO published an update to the Global COVID-19 Vaccination Strategy today, in response to the spread of Omicron subvariants, advances in vaccine evidence, and lessons from the global vaccination program.



In the first year of rollouts, COVID-19 vaccines are estimated to have saved 19.8 million lives. Through unprecedently large and rapid rollouts worldwide, over 12 billion doses have been administered globally, in nearly every country in the world, resulting in countries reaching 60% of their populations on average.

Yet only 28% of older populations and 37% of health care workers in low-income countries have been vaccinated with their primary series. 27 of WHO's Member States have not yet started a booster or additional dose program, 11 of which are low-income countries.



The strategy aims to use primary and booster doses to reduce deaths and severe disease, in order to protect health systems, societies and economies. On the way to reaching the 70% vaccination target, countries should prioritize achieving the underpinning targets of vaccinating 100% of health care workers and 100% of the most vulnerable groups, including older populations (over 60s) and those who are immunocompromised or have underlying conditions.



“Even where 70% vaccination coverage is achieved, if significant numbers of health workers, older people and other at-risk groups remain unvaccinated, deaths will continue, health systems will remain under pressure and the global recovery will be at risk,” said WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. “Vaccinating all those most at risk is the single best way to save lives, protect health systems and keep societies and economies open.”

To ensure vaccines reach the highest priority groups, the strategy emphasizes the need for measuring progress in vaccinating these groups and developing targeted approaches to reach them. Approaches include using local data and engaging communities to sustain demand for vaccines, building systems for vaccinating adults, and reaching more displaced people through humanitarian response.

The strategy also has the goal of accelerating development and ensuring equitable access to improved vaccines to substantially reduce transmission as the top priority but also to achieve durable, broadly protective immunity.



Current vaccines were designed to prevent serious illness and death, which they have succeeded in doing, saving millions of lives. However, they have not substantially reduced transmission. As the virus continues to circulate widely, new and dangerous variants are emerging, including some which reduce the efficacy of vaccines. It is fundamental to continue investing in research and development to make more effective, easier to administer vaccines, such as nasal spray products.



Other vital actions to take include: equitably distributing manufacturing facilities across regions and supporting strong vaccine delivery programs. WHO will continue to collaborate with COVAX and COVID-19 Vaccine Delivery Partnership (CoVDP) partners to support countries with rollouts, such as through packaging COVID-19 vaccination with other health interventions.



Note to editors:

The Global COVID-19 Vaccination Strategy in a Changing World: July 2022 update can be read in its entirety here.
INB members agreed that a new international instrument on pandemic prevention should be legally binding

Any final decision on the new instrument will be made by the World Health Assembly under Article 19 of WHO Constitution

The INB will meet next in December 2022 and will deliver a progress report to the World Health Assembly in May 2023.

As with all international instruments, governments themselves will determine actions under the accord while considering their own national laws and regulations.

2ND meeting of the INB to draft and negotiate a WHO convention, agreement or other international instrument on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response concludes, with agreement that the new instrument should be legally binding

The Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB) to draft and negotiate a WHO convention, agreement or other international instrument on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response held its second meeting in Geneva from 18-21 July 2022.

The INB’s work aims to ensure better preparedness and equitable response for future pandemics, and to advance the principles of equity, solidarity and health for all. The INB is a subdivision of the World Health Assembly, the decision-making body of WHO, and is comprised of WHO’s 194 Member States, Associate Members, and regional economic integration organizations.

This week, INB members agreed, through consensus, that they will work to conclude a new, legally-binding international pandemic agreement. They are working to conclude this agreement in May 2024.

The next meeting of the INB will be held in December 2022, and the INB will deliver a progress report to the 76th World Health Assembly in 2023.

As with all international instruments, any new agreement, if and when agreed by Member States, is drafted and negotiated by governments themselves, who will take any action in line with their sovereignty.

Several sessions of the INB2 were publicly webcast, including the session that addressed the potential substance of the future agreement, recorded and accessible here.

The INB process is broad and inclusive with strong engagement open to all 194 WHO Member States, as well as relevant stakeholders from around the world, including UN Agencies, intergovernmental organizations and non-State actors in official relations with WHO.

The WHO Secretariat is also conducting global public hearings to support the work of the INB; the first round of hearings took place in April 2022 and a second round is expected to take place in September this year.

Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO’s Director-General, addressed the INB members and welcomed this historic step forward to safeguard families and communities everywhere from the threat of future pandemics. He thanked all Member States and relevant stakeholders for the commitment and engagement in the process so far. “The importance of a legally binding instrument cannot be overstated: it will be our collective legacy for future generations,” he said.

The INB acknowledged the work towards the amendments of the International Health Regulations (2005) and the need for coherence and complementarity between the two workstreams.

The Co-Chair of the INB, Ms Precious Matsoso, from South Africa, said: “The decision today is a first important step of our critical work together. But we still have many hills to climb. It is a journey that will require all of us to stand together. We, as Co-Chairs of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body, are grateful to count on committed Member States and resolute Members of the Bureau to reach success in our collective work.”
Around the world, millions of refugees and migrants in vulnerable situations, such as low-skilled migrant workers, face poorer health outcomes than their host communities, especially where living and working conditions are sub-standard, according to the first WHO World report on the health of refugees and migrants. This has dire consequences for the probability that the world will not achieve the health-related Sustainable Development Goals for these populations.



“Today there are some one billion migrants globally, about one in eight people. The experience of migration is a key determinant of health and wellbeing, and refugees and migrants remain among the most vulnerable and neglected members of many societies,” said Dr Tedros. “This report is the first to offer a global review of refugee and migrant health; it calls for urgent and collective action to ensure they can access health care services that are sensitive to their needs. It also illustrates the pressing need to address the root causes of ill health and to radically reorient health systems to respond to a world increasingly in motion.”

Based on an extensive review of literature from around the world, the report demonstrates that refugees and migrants are not inherently less healthy than host populations. It is, rather, the impact of the various suboptimal health determinants, such as education, income, housing, access to services, compounded by linguistic, cultural, legal and other barriers and the interaction of these during the life course, that are behind poor health outcomes.



The report reiterates that the experience of migration and displacement is a key factor in a person’s health and wellbeing, especially when combined with other determinants. For example, a recent meta-analysis of more than 17 million participants from 16 countries across five WHO regions found that, compared with non-migrant workers, migrant workers were less likely to use health services and more likely to have an occupational injury. Evidence also showed that a significant number of the 169 million migrant workers globally are engaged in dirty, dangerous, and demanding jobs and are at greater risk of occupational accidents, injuries, and work-related health problems than their non-migrant counterparts, conditions exacerbated by their often limited or restricted access to and use of health services.

The Report demonstrated critical gaps in data and health information systems regarding the health of refugees and migrants – while data and evidence are plentiful, they are fragmented and not comparable across countries and over time. Although these mobile populations are sometimes identifiable in global datasets used for SDG monitoring, health data are often missing from migration statistics and migratory status variables are often missing from health statistics. This makes it difficult to determine and track progress for refugees and migrants towards the health-related SDGs.

“It is imperative that we do more on refugees and migrants’ health but if we want to change the status quo, we need urgent investments to improve the quality, relevance and completeness of health data on refugees and migrants. We need sound data collection and monitoring systems that truly represent the diversity of the world population and the experience that refugees and migrants face the world over and that can guide more effective policies and interventions,” said Dr Zsuzsanna Jakab, WHO’s Deputy Director-General.



While lack of comparable data on the health of refugees and migrants across countries and over time often impedes good policy development towards health equity, policies and frameworks do exist that address and respond to the health needs of refugees and migrants. However, disparities in health outcomes remain and the report shows that they are mainly due to a lack of meaningful and effective implementation of policies.



“Health does not begin or end at a country’s border. Migratory status should therefore not be a discriminatory factor but a policy driver on which to build and strengthen healthcare and social and financial protection. We must reorient existing health systems into integrated and inclusive health services for refugees and migrants, in line with the principles of primary health care and universal health coverage,” said Dr Santino Severoni, Director of WHO’s Health and Migration Programme.



Refugees and migrants can introduce innovative ideas that drive economic and social transformation. The Report highlights the extraordinary contributions of refugee and migrant healthcare workers to the COVID-19 frontline response. One of the most notable was the contributions of migrants in several countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), which were particularly significant when in some countries as many as half of doctors or nurses are foreign born.



Implementing inclusive health systems that conform to the principle of right to health for all and universal health coverage would permit individuals in need of health services to be identified and supported early, before many problems become acute. Health systems are only as strong as their weakest link. The inclusion of refugees and migrants is a worthwhile investment for the development and wellbeing of societies around the world.

Note to Editors:

Signatories to the world report are quoted here:



“Recognizing that migration and displacement have an impact on the health of the billion people on the move, this Report marks a welcome advance in thinking of migration and displacement through one clarifying glass. The lens is universal health coverage and the idea that everyone has a right to ‘complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity’, as stated in the WHO Constitution in 1946.”

Ban Ki-moon, Chairman of Ban Ki-moon Foundation for a Better Future, 8th Secretary-General of the United Nations



“The physical, economic and psychological challenges posed by migration and displacement, and integration in host communities, are often misheard, overlooked or misperceived. I welcome how this Report assembles available global evidence on the health of people on the move – international migrants and those forcibly displaced – in a single authoritative document.”

Abdulrazak Gurnah, Novelist and Professor, Nobel Prize in Literature (2021)



“This Report demonstrates that the most efficient way to meet the health needs of refugees and migrants in the short, medium and long term is by integrated health systems and by including refugees and migrants within systems that serve the host communities. In spite of the significant resources and technical improvements this may require, a more inclusive health system has proven to be hugely beneficial for all, refugees, migrants and host communities alike.”

Midori de Habich, Former Minister of Health, Peru
The WHO Director-General has the pleasure of transmitting the Report of the twelfth meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR) Emergency Committee regarding the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, held on Friday, 8 July 2022, from 12:00 to 15:30 CEST.



The WHO Director-General concurs with the advice offered by the Committee regarding the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and determines that the event continues to constitute a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).



The WHO Director-General considered the advice provided by the Committee regarding the proposed Temporary Recommendations. The set of Temporary Recommendations issued by the WHO Director-General is presented at the end of this statement.



The WHO Director-General is taking the opportunity to express his sincere gratitude to the Chair, and Members of the Committee, as well as to its Advisors.



===



Proceedings of the meeting

On behalf of the WHO Director-General, the Executive Director of the WHO Health Emergencies Programme, Dr Michael J. Ryan, welcomed Members and Advisors of the Emergency Committee, all of whom were convened by videoconference.



Dr Ryan expressed concern regarding the current global COVID-19 epidemiological situation. Cases of COVID-19 reported to WHO had increased by 30% in the last two weeks, largely driven by Omicron BA.4, BA.5 and other descendent lineages and the lifting of public health and social measures (PHSM). This increase in cases was translating into pressure on health systems in a number of WHO regions. Dr Ryan highlighted additional challenges to the ongoing COVID-19 response: recent changes in testing policies that hinder the detection of cases and the monitoring of virus evolution; inequities in access to testing, sequencing, vaccines and therapeutics, including new antivirals; waning of natural and vaccine-derived protection; and the global burden of Post COVID-19 condition.



The Ethics Officer from the Department of Compliance, Risk Management, and Ethics briefed Members and Advisers on their roles and responsibilities. Members and Advisors were also reminded of their duty of confidentiality as to the meeting discussions and the work of the Committee, as well as their individual responsibility to disclose to WHO, in a timely manner, any interests of a personal, professional, financial, intellectual or commercial nature that may give rise to a perceived or direct conflict of interest. Each Member and Advisor who was present was surveyed. No conflicts of interest were identified.



The Representative of the Office of Legal Counsel briefed the Members and Advisors on their roles and responsibilities and the mandate of the Emergency Committee under the relevant articles of the IHR.



The meeting was handed over to the Chair of the Emergency Committee regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, Professor Didier Houssin. The Chair introduced the objectives of the meeting: to provide views to the WHO Director-General on whether the COVID-19 pandemic continues to constitute a PHEIC, and to review temporary recommendations to States Parties.



The WHO Secretariat presented a global overview of current status of the COVID-19 pandemic, and highlighted a number of challenges to the ongoing response. The presentation focused on: the global COVID-19 epidemiological situation; the evolution of the virus and the impact of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern; an update on international travel-related measures; the current status of COVID-19 vaccination and progress towards WHO vaccination targets; and the 2022 WHO Strategic preparedness, readiness and response plan.



Deliberative session

The Committee discussed the following issues: the impact of SARS-CoV-2 virus evolution on the public health response and capacities of health services; progress towards increasing COVID-19 vaccination coverage; changes in testing and surveillance strategies; societal and political risk perception and community engagement; equity and access to countermeasures, vaccines and therapeutics; and maintaining political engagement while balancing the need to respond to other public health priorities and emergencies. The Committee discussed that SARS-CoV-2 virus had not yet established its ecological niche and that the implications of a pandemic caused by a novel respiratory virus may not be fully understood. Consequently, given the current shape and unpredictable dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Committee emphasized the need to reduce the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 virus. This requires the responsible, consistent, and continued use of individual-level protective measures, to the benefit of communities as a whole; as well as the continued adjustments of community-wide PHSM, to overcome the “all or nothing” binary approaches.



The Committee expressed concern as to the ongoing changes observed in States Parties with respect to steep reductions in testing, resulting in reduced coverage and quality of surveillance as fewer cases are being detected and reported to WHO; and fewer genomic sequences being submitted to open access platforms – resulting in a lack of representativeness of genomic sequences from all WHO regions. This impedes assessments of currently circulating and emerging variants of the virus, including the generation and analysis of phenotypic data. The above is translating into the increasing inability to interpret trends in transmission, and consequently to properly inform the adjustments of PHSM.



The epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2 virus infection remains unpredictable as the virus continues to evolve, through sustained transmission in the human population and in domestic, farmed, and wild animals in which the virus was newly introduced.



The Committee noted that both the trajectory of viral evolution and the characteristics of emerging variants of the virus remain uncertain and unpredictable, and, in the absence of the adoption of PHSM aiming at reducing transmission, the resulting selective pressure on the virus increases the probability of new, fitter variants emerging, with different degrees of virulence, transmissibility, and immune escape potential.



For these reasons, the Committee highlighted the need for all States Parties to continue to apply PHSM proportionate to their epidemiological situation, stressing the continued use of effective, individual-level protective measures to reduce transmission. The Committee acknowledged the ongoing challenges faced by States Parties in adjusting and implementing PHSM. The Committee acknowledged WHO’s advice to States Parties to regularly assess the epidemiological situation at sub-national levels and adjust PHSM proportionately. PHSM should be adjusted based on estimates of disease prevalence and population protection from infection and vaccination, as well as the capacities of the local health system (already challenged, inter alia, by staff shortages due to COVID-19 related burn-out).



The Committee highlighted the need to improve surveillance, by broadening and developing an array of approaches and tools aiming at achieving global situational population- based and geographic representativeness. These include, but are not limited to, the integration of self-testing results and sentinel surveillance approaches into national and global surveillance schemes, and aggregate sampling strategies with Nucleic Acid Amplification Test-based tools and detailed deep genome sequence probing. Novel surveillance approaches would enhance better assessment of trends in epidemiology of infection, disease, and viral evolution, as well as trends in health system capacity, and support agility and timely adjustments of PHSM. The Committee acknowledged the need to expedite integration of COVID-19 surveillance into routine systems, for instance by integrating COVID-19 surveillance with the surveillance of other respiratory pathogens; and recognized the potential value of supplementing surveillance with wastewater surveillance. In addition, access to timely and accurate testing, with linkage to clinical care and therapeutics, needs to be maintained.



The Committee recognised the continued work of WHO and partners in increasing vaccination coverage in all six WHO regions, with focus in achieving the highest possible vaccination coverage among persons at highest risk of severe disease outcomes and among persons at highest risk of exposure; as well as assessing and addressing barriers to vaccine uptake. However, given the persistent vaccine inequities, the Committee reinforced the need for ensuring that the highest priority groups are vaccinated in every country, with a primary series and booster dose, in accordance with WHO global vaccination strategy and the updated WHO SAGE Roadmap for prioritizing uses of COVID-19 vaccines. The Committee expressed concern over the lack of data shared with WHO on vaccination coverage in the high priority groups for 30% of the countries. The Committee acknowledged the disruption the pandemic continues to have on routine immunization activities, which is resulting in outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases in areas of low coverage.



The Committee highlighted that immediate efforts are warranted to promote access for Low and Middle Income Countries to therapeutics that reduce disease severity in both ambulant and hospitalised patients. The Committee warned that the lack of equitable access that occurred with vaccines should not be repeated with therapeutics. The Committee also highlighted the continued need for further research and development for COVID-19 in the areas of epidemiology and variants, diagnostics, clinical care including care for Post COVID-19 condition, and additional COVID-19 vaccines.



Given the general public’s perception that the pandemic may be over, the Committee also highlighted the ongoing challenges in communicating, particularly to communities that continue to experience high levels of transmission, that the mitigation of the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, in the immediate and longer terms, depends on the use of PHSM. The Committee emphasised the importance of using learning from the last two and a half years to nuance the implementation of PHSM in individual communities. The Committee acknowledged that any risk communication and community engagement effort should hinge on consistent and synchronized political will, policies, and a concert of community influencers to shift the course of risk perception.



Status of the Public Health Emergency of International Concern

The Committee recognized an overall decoupling of incident cases from severe disease, deaths, and pressure on health systems in the context of increased population immunity.



However, the Committee unanimously agreed that the COVID-19 pandemic still meets the criteria of an extraordinary event that continues to adversely impact the health of the world’s population, and that the emergence and international spread of new SARS-CoV-2 variants may present an even greater health impact.



The Committee explicitly indicated the following reasons underpinning their advice to the WHO Director-General as to the event continuing to constitute a PHEIC.



Firstly, the recent increase in the growth rate of cases in many States Parties in different WHO regions.



Secondly, the continuing and substantial evolution of SARS-CoV-2 virus, which, while inherent to all viruses, is expected to continue in an unpredictable manner. Yet the ability to assess the impact of variants on transmission, disease characteristics, or countermeasures, including diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines, is becoming increasingly difficult as a result of the inadequacy of current surveillance, including the reductions in testing and genomic sequencing. Additionally, there are uncertainties surrounding the level of readiness of already overburdened health systems, across all WHO regions, to respond to future COVID-19 pandemic waves.



Thirdly, public health and health planning tools to reduce transmission and disease burden (including hospitalisations and admissions to intensive care units of severe cases, and the impact of post COVID-19 condition) are not being implemented in proportion to local transmission levels or health system capacities.



Finally, there are inadequacies in risk communication and community engagement related to the need for the implementation or adjustment of PHSM, as well as a disconnect in the perception of risk posed by COVID-19 between scientific communities, political leaders and the general public.



For these reasons, continued coordination of the international response is necessary to reconsider approaches allowing for the accurate and reliable monitoring of the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic and triggering of adjustments to PHSM. Coordination is also still necessary to intensify and sustain development and research efforts related to effective and equitably available countermeasures and to develop further risk communication and community engagement approaches.



The Committee considered the Temporary Recommendations proposed by the WHO Secretariat and provided its advice.



===



Temporary Recommendations issued by the WHO Director-General to all States Parties
WHO today released the first-ever report on the pipeline of the vaccines currently in development to prevent infections caused by antimicrobial-resistant (AMR) bacterial pathogens. WHO’s analysis points to the need to accelerate trials for AMR related vaccines in late-stage development and maximise the use of existing vaccines.

The silent pandemic of antimicrobial resistance is of major growing public health concern. Resistant bacterial infections alone are associated with nearly 4.95 million deaths per year, with 1.27 million deaths directly attributed to AMR. But AMR is about more than bacterial infections. AMR occurs when bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites change over time and no longer respond to medicines. When an individual becomes infected with these microbes, the infection is said to be resistant to antimicrobial medicines. These infections are often difficult to treat.

Vaccines are powerful tools to prevent infections in the first place, and therefore have the potential to curb the spread of AMR infections. The AMR vaccine pipeline report aims to guide investments and research into feasible vaccines to mitigate AMR.

The analysis identifies sixty-one vaccine candidates in various stages of clinical development, including several in late stages of development to address diseases listed on the bacterial priority pathogens list, which WHO has prioritized for R&D. While the report describes these late-stage vaccine candidates as having a high development feasibility, the report cautions that most will not be available anytime soon.

“Preventing infections using vaccination reduces the use of antibiotics, which is one of the main drivers of AMR. Yet of the top six bacterial pathogens responsible for deaths due to AMR, only one, Pneumococcal disease (Streptococcus pneumoniae) has a vaccine” said Dr Hanan Balkhy, WHO Assistant Director-General, Antimicrobial Resistance. “Affordable and equitable access to life-saving vaccines such as those against pneumococcus, are urgently needed to save lives, and mitigate the rise of AMR” she added.

The report calls for equitable and global access to the vaccines that already exist, especially among populations that need them most in limited-resource settings. There are already vaccines available against four priority bacterial pathogens: pneumococcal disease (Streptococcus pneumoniae), Hib (Haemophilus influenzae type b) Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis) and Typhoid fever (Salmonella Typhi). Current Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccines against tuberculosis (TB) do not adequately protect against TB and the development of more effective vaccines against TB should be accelerated. The remaining three vaccines are effective, and we need to increase the number of people receiving them to contribute to a reduction in the use of antibiotics and prevent further deaths.

Of significance in the global fight against AMR, the bacteria noted in the priority pathogens list pose a significant threat to public health precisely because of their resistance to antibiotics – but they currently have a very weak vaccine pipeline in terms of the number of candidates and feasibility. Vaccines against these pathogens are unlikely to be available in the short term, and alternative interventions should be pursued urgently to prevent resistant infections due to priority bacterial pathogens

“Disruptive approaches are needed to enrich the pipeline and accelerate vaccine development. The lessons from Covid 19 vaccine development and mRNA vaccines offer unique opportunities to explore for developing vaccines against bacteria’’ said Dr Haileyesus Getahun, WHO Director of AMR Global Coordination Department.

The report examines some of the challenges facing vaccine innovation and development, including for pathogens associated with hospital-acquired infections (HAI). These include the difficulty in defining target population(s) among all admitted hospital patients; the cost and complexity of vaccine efficacy trials; and the lack of regulatory and/or policy precedent for vaccines against HAIs.

“Vaccine development is expensive, and scientifically challenging, and are associated with high failure rates. For successful candidates complex regulatory and manufacturing requirements often exist. We have to leverage the lessons of COVID vaccine development and speed up our search for vaccines to address AMR.” said Dr Kate O’Brien, Director Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals Department at WHO.

The full report can be read here.
WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has welcomed contributions from Norway and Sweden to the ACT-Accelerator, which have taken both countries over their ‘fair share’ allocation.

Contributions of US$ 340 million from Norway and US$ 300 million from Sweden will accelerate efforts to get vaccines into arms, facilitate access to new treatments and ensure health systems can meet the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Norway and Sweden join Germany in having exceeded their fair share for ACT-A’s 2021/22 budget, with Canada pledging to do the same. ‘Fair share’ calculations are based on the size of a country’s national economy and what they would gain from a faster recovery of the global economy and trade.

In February 2022, President Ramaphosa of South Africa and Prime Minister Støre of Norway – in their roles as co-chairs of the ACT-Accelerator Facilitation Council - made a call to 55 countries to jointly support global efforts to end the COVID-19 crisis and contribute their ‘fair share’ to the ACT-Accelerator agencies’ urgent needs.

These contributions from Norway and Sweden reinforce the strong support that both countries have provided to the ACT-Accelerator since its inception in 2020.

The ACT-Accelerator now faces a funding gap of US$ 11.2 billion, having received contributions totaling US$ 5.6 billion for the 2021/22 budget.

WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said: “I wish to commend Norway and Sweden for their commitment towards the vital work of the ACT-Accelerator. We call on other countries to follow their lead in contributing their fair share, and get COVID-19 vaccines, tests and treatments to those who need them most. We have made tremendous progress in reducing mortality and transmission. But cases are still on the rise in 110 countries. Our job is not over. We must ensure that all countries are equipped to fight future waves of COVID-19.”
The World Health Organization (WHO) welcomes the political declaration to be adopted by Member States during the High-level Meeting of the UN General Assembly on Global Road Safety. It commits to cut road traffic deaths and injuries by 50% by 2030, a milestone for road safety and sustainable mobility.

The meeting takes place on 30 June – 1 July 2022 under the theme “The 2030 horizon for road safety: securing a decade of action and delivery”.

Road safety affects everyone. We step from our homes every day onto roads that take us to our jobs, schools and to meet our vital daily needs. Yet our transport systems remain far too dangerous. No death should be acceptable on our roads. The future of mobility should promote health and well-being, protect the environment and benefit all,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General, WHO. “It will require transformative leadership from the highest levels of government to act on the Political Declaration to make that vision a reality.”

Worldwide, road crashes currently kill around 1.3 million people each year – more than 2 every minute, and more than 90% occur in low- and middle-income countries. Crashes are the biggest killer of children and young people globally. More than 50 million people have died on the world’s roads since the invention of the automobile, more than the number of deaths in the First World War or in some of the worst global epidemics.

WHO is the lead agency for road safety in the United Nations and supported the President of the UN General Assembly in preparing this High-Level Meeting in collaboration with other UN agencies.

Through the declaration governments from around the world commit to provide leadership and coordination at the highest level of government to ensure all parts of the society are included to act on road safety and commit to boost policies and actions to reduce deaths and injuries. The declaration calls for the development and funding of national and local plans with clear targets and funding.

“Road traffic deaths upend countless lives and cost countries around 3% of GDP each year,” notes Dr Etienne Krug, Director of the Department for Social Determinants of Health, WHO. “This is an unacceptable price to pay for mobility. Putting safety at the heart of our mobility systems is an urgent health, economic and moral imperative. Let’s work together to scale up what works, save lives and build streets for life.”

In September 2020, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution to proclaim the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021–2030. WHO and the UN regional commissions, in cooperation with other partners in the UN Road Safety Collaboration, have developed a Global Plan for the Decade of Action, which was released in October 2021.

The plan calls for continued improvements in the design of roads and vehicles, enhancement of laws and law enforcement, and provision of timely, life-saving emergency care for the injured. In addition, it promotes healthy and environmentally sound modes of transport.

It also highlights that responsibility for road safety stretches far beyond health and transport. Urban planners and engineers must prioritize safety as a core value in all transport infrastructure while businesses can influence and contribute to strengthening road safety by applying safety-first principles to their entire value chains.

Countries and cities guided by the plan are seeing dramatic reductions in deaths. For example, the Colombian capital of Bogota halved deaths over 10 years through a set of integrated actions, including wide-ranging technical improvements and regulatory reforms that were driven by strong leadership.

The meeting will take place in New York on 30 June 2022, at 10:00 EST. The event will be broadcasted on UN Web TV.
WHO is scaling up its operations in eastern Africa as the region faces acute food insecurity caused by conflict, extreme weather events – including the worst drought in 40 years – induced by climate change, rising international food and fuel prices and the impact of the pandemic.

Over 80 million people in the eastern African region are food insecure and resorting to desperate measures to feed themselves and their families. Acute malnutrition is high, especially among children.

As malnutrition increases, the health needs in the region are mounting, especially among children, and clean water is becoming scarce. As people leave their homes in search of food, they can no longer access health services, and become more at risk from disease outbreaks.

“The cost of inaction is high,” said Dr Ibrahima Socé Fall, WHO Assistant Director-General for Emergency Response. “While the clear priority is to prevent people from starving, we must simultaneously strengthen our health response to prevent disease and save lives. Even one life lost from a vaccine-preventable disease, diarrhoea, or medical complications from malnutrition in today’s world is one life too many.”

Dr Fall was speaking in Nairobi where WHO convened a two-day meeting [26-27 June 2022] to plan its response across the seven countries affected by the health emergency – Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan and Uganda – and coordinate with other UN agencies and partners.

WHO’s emergency response is focused on ensuring affected populations can access essential health services, treating sick children with severe malnutrition, and preventing, detecting and responding to infectious disease outbreaks.

WHO is setting up a hub in Nairobi, from where it will coordinate the response and organize the delivery of life-saving medical supplies to where they are needed most. These supplies include medicines, vaccines, as well the medicines and equipment needed to treat children who are severely malnourished. Other than providing these critical supplies, WHO is working with ministries of health in the affected countries to set up robust disease surveillance systems to be able to quickly detect and respond to disease outbreaks.

Note to editors
The devastating human, economic, and social cost of COVID-19 has highlighted the urgent need for coordinated action to build stronger health systems and mobilize additional resources for pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response (PPR).

The World Bank’s Board of Executive Directors today approved the establishment of a financial intermediary fund (FIF) that will finance critical investments to strengthen pandemic PPR capacities at national, regional, and global levels, with a focus on low- and middle-income countries. The fund will bring additional, dedicated resources for PPR, incentivize countries to increase investments, enhance coordination among partners, and serve as a platform for advocacy. The FIF will complement the financing and technical support provided by the World Bank, leverage the strong technical expertise of WHO, and engage other key organizations.

Developed with leadership from the United States, and from Italy and Indonesia as part of their G20 Presidencies, and with broad support from the G20 and beyond, over US$1 billion in financial commitments have already been announced for the FIF, including contributions from the United States, the European Union, Indonesia, Germany, the United Kingdom, Singapore, the Gates Foundation and the Wellcome Trust.

“I’m pleased by the broad support from our shareholders for a new Financial Intermediary Fund at the World Bank,” World Bank Group President David Malpass said. “The World Bank is the largest provider of financing for PPR with active operations in over 100 developing countries to strengthen their health systems. The FIF will provide additional, long-term funding to complement the work of existing institutions in supporting low- and middle-income countries and regions to prepare for the next pandemic.”

“Access to financing for pandemic prevention and preparedness is crucial. COVID-19 has exposed major gaps in preparedness capacities, which the Financial Intermediary Fund can address in a coherent manner, as part of the global architecture for health emergency preparedness and response,” said WHO Director General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. “WHO will play a central role in the FIF, providing technical leadership for its work in close collaboration with the World Bank to realize this ambitious vision.”

The goal of the FIF is to provide financing to address critical gaps in pandemic PPR to strengthen country capacity in areas such as disease surveillance, laboratory systems, health workforce, emergency communication and management, and community engagement. It can also help address gaps in strengthening regional and global capacity, for example, by supporting data sharing, regulatory harmonization, and capacity for coordinated development, procurement, distribution and deployment of countermeasures and essential medical supplies.

In the coming weeks, the Bank and WHO will work closely with donors and other partners to develop the detailed scope and design of the FIF. The ongoing discussions will be informed by the extensive inputs provided through stakeholder engagement. The goal is to launch the FIF in fall 2022.

Drawing on its financial and legal platform, program management and operational expertise, and experience in managing FIFs, the World Bank will serve as the FIF’s Trustee and host the Secretariat, which will be staffed by the Bank and WHO. Drawing on its technical expertise, the WHO will also lead on supporting and coordinating the work of the FIF’s technical advisory panel. Implementing entities for FIF-financed projects in addition to the World Bank Group are expected to include WHO, other multilateral development banks and United Nations agencies, as well as other organizations. The FIF will build on the existing global health architecture for PPR, within the context of the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) and associated monitoring mechanisms, with a central technical role for WHO.

Key principles of the FIF will be to complement the work of existing institutions that provide international financing for PPR, drawing on their comparative advantages and catalyzing funding from private, philanthropic, and bilateral sources. Further, the FIF is expected to incentivize countries to invest more in PPR, serve as an integrator of PPR efforts, and have the flexibility to work through a variety of existing institutions and adjust over time as needs and the institutional landscape evolve. The FIF’s structure will combine inclusivity and agility and operate with high standards of transparency and accountability.
The World Health Summit (WHS) and the World Health Organization (WHO) join forces to organize the 2022 edition of one of the world's leading international, inclusive and inter-sectoral global health conference to bring global health actors closer to setting agenda for a healthier future.



Registration for on-site participation is now open



The Summit will take place on 16-18 October 2022 in Berlin, Germany. Participants will focus on “Making the Choice for Health” by reflecting on pressing topics such as Investment for Health and Well-Being, Climate Change and Planetary Health, Architecture for Pandemic Preparedness, Digital Transformation for Health, Food Systems and Health, Health Systems Resilience and Equity, and Global Health for Peace.



See more information about the programme and the confirmed speakers here



WHS 2022 is a milestone in a long-term collaboration, as WHO has been a strategic partner of the World Health Summit since its start.



WHS 2022 aims to strengthen exchange, stimulate innovative solutions to health challenges, foster global health as a key political issue and promote the global health debate in the spirit of the UN Sustainable Development Goals: SDG 17 “Partnership for the Goals”



For more information, visit: https://www.worldhealthsummit.org

For media inquiries, follow: https://www.worldhealthsummit.org/whs-2022/media-center.html

More information available here
The WHO Director-General has the pleasure of transmitting the Report of the Meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR) Emergency Committee regarding the multi-country monkeypox outbreak, held on 23 June 2022, from 12:00 to 17:00 Geneva time (CEST). The WHO Director-General concurs with the advice offered by the IHR Emergency Committee regarding the multi-country monkeypox outbreak and, at present, does not determine that the event constitutes a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).

Since 11 May 2022, the WHO Secretariat alerted the States Parties to the IHR in relation to this event, through postings on the Event Information Site (a secured platform established by the WHO Secretariat for information sharing with States Parties to the IHR). These postings aimed to raise awareness about the extent of the outbreak, inform readiness efforts, and provide access to technical guidance for immediate public health actions recommended by the WHO Secretariat.

Convening an IHR Emergency Committee signals an escalation of the level of alert for States Parties to the IHR and the international public health community, and it represents a call for intensified public health actions in response to this event.

The WHO Director-General is taking the opportunity to express his most sincere gratitude to the Chair, Vice-Chair, and Members of the IHR Emergency Committee, as well as to its Advisers.

Proceedings of the meeting

Members of and Advisers to the Emergency Committee were convened in person (Chair and Vice-Chair) and by teleconference, via Zoom.

The WHO Secretariat welcomed the participants. The Representative of the Office of Legal Counsel briefed the Members and Advisers on their roles and responsibilities and identified the mandate of the Emergency Committee under the relevant articles of the IHR. The Ethics Officer from the Department of Compliance, Risk Management, and Ethics provided the Members and Advisers with an overview of the WHO Declaration of Interests process. The Members and Advisers were made aware of their individual responsibility to disclose to WHO, in a timely manner, any interests of a personal, professional, financial, intellectual or commercial nature that may give rise to a perceived or actual conflict of interest. They were additionally reminded of their duty to maintain the confidentiality of the meeting discussions and the work of the Committee. Each Member and Adviser was surveyed. No conflicts of interest were identified.

The Principal Legal Officer then facilitated the election of officers of the Committee, in accordance with the rules of procedures and working methods of the Emergency Committee. Dr Jean-Marie Okwo-Bele was elected as Chair of the Committee, Professor Nicola Low as Vice-Chair, and Dr Inger Damon as Rapporteur, all by acclamation. The meeting was handed over to the Chair who introduced the objectives of the meeting: to provide views to the WHO Director-General on whether the event constitutes a public health emergency of international concern, and if so, to provide views on potential temporary recommendations.

Presentations

The WHO Director-General joined by video and welcomed the participants, welcoming the Committee’s advice on the event.

The WHO Secretariat presented the global epidemiological situation, highlighting that since the beginning of May 2022, 3040 cases have been reported to WHO from 47 countries. Transmission is occurring in many countries that have not previously reported cases of monkeypox, and the highest numbers of cases are currently reported from countries in the WHO European Region. Initial cases of monkeypox, detected in several countries in different WHO Regions, had no epidemiological links to areas that have historically reported monkeypox, suggesting that undetected transmission might have been ongoing for some time in those countries. The majority of confirmed cases of monkeypox are male and most of these cases occur among gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men in urban areas and are clustered social and sexual networks.

The clinical presentation is often atypical, with few lesions localized to the genital, perineal/perianal or peri-oral area that do not spread further, and an asynchronous rash that appears prior to the development of a prodromal phase (i.e. lymphadenopathy, fever, malaise). There have been few hospitalizations to date, and one death in an immunocompromised individual was reported. Some preliminary research has estimated that the reproduction number (R0) to be 0.8 and, among cases who identify as men who have sex with men, to be greater than 1. The mean incubation period among cases reported is estimated at 8.5 days, ranging from 4.2 to 17.3 days (based on 18 cases in Netherlands). The mean serial interval is estimated at 9.8 days (95% CI 5.9-21.4 day, based on 17 case-contact pairs in the United Kingdom). To date, 10 cases of infection have been reported among health care workers, of which at least nine were non-occupational.

Representatives of Canada, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom updated the Committee on the epidemiological situation in their countries and the current response efforts.

The WHO Secretariat then presented the draft “WHO Strategic Plan for the Containment of the Multi-Country Monkeypox Outbreak.” The plan emphasized that a strengthened, agile, and collaborative approach must be adopted, with a particular focus on raising awareness and empowering affected population groups to adopt safe behaviors and protective measures based on the risks they face, and on stopping further spread of monkeypox within those population groups.

The WHO Secretariat also presented their technical guidance, offered to countries in support of their efforts in responding to this event, and revolving around: enhanced surveillance; isolation of cases; contact identification and monitoring; strengthened laboratory and diagnostic capacities; clinical management and infection prevention and control measures within health care and community settings, including care pathways; engagement with affected population groups and effective communication to avoid stigmatization; robust care pathways, including the use of medical countermeasures under collaborative research frameworks, using standardized data collection tools to rapidly increase evidence generation on efficacy and safety of these products.

Deliberative session

Following the presentations session, the Committee reconvened in a closed meeting to examine the questions in relation to whether the event constitutes a PHEIC or not, and if so, to consider the Temporary Recommendations, drafted by the WHO Secretariat in accordance with IHR provisions. At the request of the Chair, the WHO Secretariat reminded the Committee Members of their mandate and recalled the definition of a PHEIC under the IHR: an extraordinary event, which constitutes a public health risk to other States through international transmission, and which potentially requires a coordinated international response.

The Committee discussed key issues related to the outbreak, including: current observations of plateauing or potential downward trends in case numbers in some of the countries experiencing outbreak early on; the need for further understanding of transmission dynamics; the challenges related to contact tracing, particularly because of anonymous contacts, and potential links to international gatherings and LGBTQI+ Pride events conducive for increased opportunities for exposure through intimate sexual encounters; the need for continuous evaluation of interventions that appear to have had an impact on transmission; the identification of key activities for risk communications and community engagement, working in close partnership with affected communities to raise awareness about personal protective measures and behaviours during upcoming events and gatherings; the need to evaluate the impact of different interventions, including the evaluation of vaccination strategies implemented by certain countries in response to the outbreak, and the availability and equity in access and licensing of medical countermeasures.

The Committee was concerned about the potential for exacerbation of the stigmatization and infringement of human rights, including the rights to privacy, non-discrimination, physical and mental health, of affected population groups, which would further impede response efforts. Additionally, for the protection of public health, some Members of the Committee expressed the views that laws, policies and practices that criminalize or stigmatize consensual same-sex behaviour by state or non-state actors create barriers to accessing health services and may also hamper response interventions.

Additional knowledge gaps and areas of uncertainty, for which more information is needed rapidly to support a more comprehensive assessment of the public health risk of this event, include: transmission modes; full spectrum of clinical presentation; infectious period; reservoir species and potential for reverse zoonoses; the possibility of virus; and access to vaccines and antivirals and their efficacy in humans.

The Committee recognized that monkeypox is endemic in parts of Africa, where it has been noted to cause disease, including fatalities, for decades, and that the response to this outbreak must serve as a catalyst to increase efforts to address monkeypox in the longer term and access to essential supplies worldwide.

Conclusions and advice

The Committee noted that many aspects of the current multi-country outbreak are unusual, such as the occurrence of cases in countries where monkeypox virus circulation had not been previously documented, and the fact that the vast majority of cases is observed among men who have sex with men, of young age, not previously immunized against smallpox (knowing that vaccination against smallpox is effective in protecting against monkeypox as well). Some Members suggested that, given the low level of population immunity against pox virus infection, there is a risk of further, sustained transmission into the wider population that should not be overlooked. The Committee also stressed that monkeypox virus activity has been neglected and not well controlled for years in countries in the WHO African Region.

The Committee also noted that the response to the outbreak requires collaborative international efforts, and that such response activities have already started in a number of high-income countries experiencing outbreaks, although there has been insufficient time to have evaluated the effectiveness of these activities.

While a few Members expressed differing views, the committee resolved by consensus to advise the WHO Director-General that at this stage the outbreak should be determined to not constitute a PHEIC.

However, the Committee unanimously acknowledged the emergency nature of the event and that controlling the further spread of outbreak requires intense response efforts. The Committee advised that the event should be closely monitored and reviewed after a few weeks, once more information about the current unknowns becomes available, to determine if significant changes have occurred that may warrant a reconsideration of their advice.

The Committee considered that the occurrence of one or more of the following should prompt a re-assessment of the event: evidence of an increase in the rate of growth of cases reported in the next 21 days, both among and beyond the population groups currently affected; occurrence of cases among sex workers; evidence of significant spread to and within additional countries, or significant increases in number of cases and spread in endemic countries; increase in number of cases in vulnerable groups, such as immunosuppressed individuals, including with poorly controlled HIV infection, pregnant women, and children; evidence of increased severity in reported cases (i.e. increased morbidity or mortality and rates of hospitalization; evidence of reverse spillover to the animal population; evidence of significant change in viral genome associated with phenotypic changes, leading to enhanced transmissibility, virulence or properties of immune escape, or resistance to antivirals, and reduced impact of countermeasures; evidence of cluster of cases associated with clades of greater virulence detected in new countries outside West and Central African countries.

Finally, the Committee advised the WHO Director-General that countries, in the spirit of Article 44 of the IHR, should collaborate with each other and with WHO in providing the required assistance through bilateral, regional or multilateral channels, and should follow the guidance provided by WHO (see Monkeypox).
The thirty-second meeting of the Emergency Committee under the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR) on the international spread of poliovirus was convened by the WHO Director-General on 15 June 2022 with committee members and advisers attending via video conference, supported by the WHO Secretariat. The Emergency Committee reviewed the data on wild poliovirus (WPV1) and circulating vaccine derived polioviruses (cVDPV) in the context of global eradication of WPV and cessation of outbreaks of cVDPV2 by end of 2023. Technical updates were received about the situation in the following countries and territories: Afghanistan, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Israel, Malawi, the occupied Palestinian territory and Pakistan, and written updates were provided by Eritrea and Yemen.

Wild poliovirus

The committee was very concerned that a second WPV1 had been detected in south-eastern Africa, in Mozambique, close to the border with Malawi where the first case was detected. Furthermore, genetic sequencing analysis of the two wild polioviruses indicates a single importation event from Pakistan / Afghanistan into southeastern Africa; the importation event is estimated to have occurred between July 2019 (date of the common node between Pakistan viruses and Malawi/Mozambique viruses) and December 2020 (date of the common node between Malawi and Mozambique viruses). COVID19-related severe movement restrictions implemented in March 2020 in Pakistan and Afghanistan means it is less likely exportation could have occurred between March and December 2020. The Malawi and Mozambique viruses independently evolved for about 0.9 and 1.2 years respectively until first detected and are both considered orphan viruses, and the absence of detection of circulating WPV1 viruses in Malawi and Mozambique between 2019 and 2021 suggests surveillance gaps in southeastern Africa. The original WPV1 cluster in south Asia has not been detected there since December 2020.

The committee noted that the certification of polio eradication African Region was not affected by the outbreak, as it is due to importation rather then endemic transmission. The committee also noted the importance of cross border activities in the outbreak response.

A multi-country response to the WPV1 outbreak is continuing, with four immunization rounds being conducted in Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania, Zambia; Zimbabwe will join the response for rounds 3 and 4. Additionally, retrospective case searching, surveillance strengthening and improving essential immunization are all ongoing. The committee noted that while administrative coverage was high, problems with population data made these coverage estimates unreliable. Monitoring coverage by Lot Quality Assurance Sampling (LQAS) showed far lower coverage, and the committee noted that countries that have long been polio free needed assistance from GPEI partners in the implementation of supplementary immunization activities (SIAs).

The committee was concerned about the recent outbreak of WPV1 in the North Waziristan district of southern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province in Pakistan. Since the last Emergency Committee (EC) meeting in February 2022, Pakistan has reported ten WPV1 cases from North Waziristan and two WPV1 positive environmental samples from the neighboring district of Bannu. With the ongoing WPV1 circulation in South KP, the risks to the rest of Pakistan has escalated.

The key challenges which hampered progress in southern KP include the complex security situation, specifically in North and South Waziristan, which resulted in inadequate access, missed children and reduced quality of SIAs. Community resistance with refusals to vaccination (including vaccination boycotts and fake finger-marking without vaccination), lack of female frontline workers and high turnover of frontline workers, and weak health infrastructure and service delivery all pose challenges. The ten WPV1 cases reported in 2022 are zero dose for routine immunization, zero dose or under-immunized in SIAs, and are from refusal families.

Another challenge in South KP is the sub-optimal Routine Immunization (RI) and progress on strengthening RI in South KP is slow.

The committee commended the dedication of frontline health workers who continue to seek every child who needed vaccination and extended its sympathy to the families of the 17 health workers who were killed in February 2022 in Takhar and Kunduz in Afghanistan. It is encouraging that 2.6 million previously unreached children have been vaccinated, and the number of children not yet accessed by immunization teams was down to an estimated 700,000. Data provided to the committee clearly showed that where house to house polio campaigns are possible the vaccine coverage is far higher.

There has been continuous / steady progress in the rest of Pakistan with no WPV1 detection in last 11 months. Last WPV1 case and positive environmental sample outside of South KP were detected in January 2021 and July 2021 respectively.

Circulating vaccine derived poliovirus (cVDPV)

Eritrea has reported detection of cVDPV2 for the first time, and the virus is most closely linked to a virus found in Sudan in 2020, indicating that both new international spread and missed transmission has occurred. Furthermore, the detection of cVDPV2 in Ghana, Togo and Côte d’Ivoire appears to have resulted from new spread from Nigeria. A new outbreak of cVDPV3 has been detected in Israel in a population sub-group who refuse vaccination. Environmental detection has also occurred in sites in the occupied Palestinian territory. High levels of transmission of cVDPV2 are occurring in northern Yemen, northern Nigeria, and eastern DR Congo, which have reported 115 out of 127 cases to date in 2022. Because of the conflict, no immunization rounds have been conducted in northern Yemen.

Despite the ongoing decline in the number of cases and lineages circulating, the risk of international spread of cVDPV2 remains high as evidenced by recent spread from Nigeria to West Africa. The large amount of transmission occurring in Nigeria along with chronically low immunization coverage is now resulting in spread to multiple countries, while the detection of cVDPV2 in Eritrea of an orphan virus means that missed transmission has occurred in the Horn of Africa also. The persistence of cVDPV2 in Somalia is another concern. The successful introduction of novel OPV2 and re-introduction of tOPV are expected to mitigate the risk of international spread of cVDPV2, particularly as supply issues are resolved in the second half of 2022.

The committee noted that the roll out of wider use of novel OPV2 continues under EUL. The committee also noted the delays concerning the importance of timely, quality outbreak response with countries avoiding timely response with monovalent OPV2 or trivalent OPV, preferring to wait for novel OPV2 to become available. The committee noted that SAGE recommends that speed in the rollout of any of these three vaccines is of paramount importance and countries should avoid delays associated with waiting for novel OPV2.

The committee noted that the outbreak in Israel again shows that even countries with high immunization coverage can have pockets of high risk children which can sustain an outbreak.

Conclusion

Although heartened by the apparent progress, the Committee unanimously agreed that the risk of international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) and recommended the extension of Temporary Recommendations for a further three months. The Committee recognizes the concerns regarding the lengthy duration of the polio PHEIC and the importance of exploring alternative IHR measures in the future but concluded that there are still significant risks as exemplified by the importation of virus into Malawi and Mozambique. The Committee considered the following factors in reaching this conclusion:

Ongoing risk of WPV1 international spread:

Based on the following factors, the risk of international spread of WPV1 remains:

the current outbreak of WPV1 in Pakistan where there have been 10 cases in just the last three month which must be contained;

where there have been 10 cases in just the last three month which must be contained; high-risk mobile populations in Pakistan such as migrants, nomads, displaced populations, particularly Afghan refugees represent a specific risk of international spread.

such as migrants, nomads, displaced populations, particularly Afghan refugees represent a specific risk of international spread. the unpredictable situation in Afghanistan, with ongoing and deteriorating humanitarian crises including food insecurity and risk of financial collapse disrupting eradication activities;

with ongoing and deteriorating humanitarian crises including food insecurity and risk of financial collapse disrupting eradication activities; the detection of WPV1 in Malawi and Mozambique , particularly as the route from Pakistan to Africa remains unknown;

, particularly as the route from Pakistan to Africa remains unknown; the sub-optimal immunization coverage obtained through recent rounds in southeastern Africa, meaning ongoing transmission could be occurring;

obtained through recent rounds in southeastern Africa, meaning ongoing transmission could be occurring; complacency leading to inadequate surveillance means that such transmission could be missed;

means that such transmission could be missed; the large pool of unvaccinated ‘zero dose’ children in Afghanistan in formerly inaccessible areas in many provinces, while decreasing, still represent a major risk of re-introduction of WPV1 in those communities;

in formerly inaccessible areas in many provinces, while decreasing, still represent a major risk of re-introduction of WPV1 in those communities; although COVID-19 cases are currently at low levels in Afghanistan and Pakistan, further waves of cases are possible, which may have unpredictable adverse impacts on polio surveillance and on immunization activities.

Ongoing risk of cVDPV2 international spread:

Based on the following factors, the risk of international spread of cVDPV2 appears to remain high:

the actual ongoing cross border spread including into newly infected countries;

including into newly infected countries; the explosive outbreak of cVDPV2 in northern Yemen, and ongoing high transmission in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern Nigeria, which have caused international spread to neighbouring countries;

and ongoing high transmission in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern Nigeria, which have caused international spread to neighbouring countries; the lack of timely high quality responses in many countries;

in many countries; the ever- widening gap in population intestinal mucosal immunit y in young children since the withdrawal of OPV2 in 2016 and consequently high concentration of zero dose children in certain areas, especially the four areas mentioned above (second dot point)

y in young children since the withdrawal of OPV2 in 2016 and consequently high concentration of zero dose children in certain areas, especially the four areas mentioned above (second dot point) the same factors regarding the COVID-19 pandemic as mentioned above;

Other factors include

Weak routine immunization: Many countries have weak immunization systems that can be further impacted by various humanitarian emergencies including COVID-19, and the number of countries in which immunization systems have been weakened or disrupted by conflict and complex emergencies poses a growing risk, leaving populations in these fragile states vulnerable to outbreaks of polio.

Many countries have weak immunization systems that can be further impacted by various humanitarian emergencies including COVID-19, and the number of countries in which immunization systems have been weakened or disrupted by conflict and complex emergencies poses a growing risk, leaving populations in these fragile states vulnerable to outbreaks of polio. Lack of access: Inaccessibility continues to be a major risk, particularly in several countries currently infected with cVDPV, i.e. Nigeria, Niger and Somalia, which all have sizable populations that have been unreached with polio vaccine for prolonged periods.

Risk categories



The Committee provided the Director-General with the following advice aimed at reducing the risk of international spread of WPV1 and cVDPVs, based on the risk stratification as follows:

States infected with WPV1, cVDPV1 or cVDPV3. States infected with cVDPV2, with or without evidence of local transmission: States no longer infected by WPV1 or cVDPV, but which remain vulnerable to re-infection by WPV or cVDPV.



Criteria to assess States as no longer infected by WPV1 or cVDPV:



Poliovirus Case: 12 months after the onset date of the most recent case PLUS one month to account for case detection, investigation, laboratory testing and reporting period OR when all reported AFP cases with onset within 12 months of last case have been tested for polio and excluded for WPV1 or cVDPV, and environmental or other samples collected within 12 months of the last case have also tested negative, whichever is the longer.

Environmental or other isolation of WPV1 or cVDPV (no poliovirus case): 12 months after collection of the most recent positive environmental or other sample (such as from a healthy child) PLUS one month to account for the laboratory testing and reporting period

These criteria may be varied for the endemic countries, where more rigorous assessment is needed in reference to surveillance gaps.

Once a country meets these criteria as no longer infected, the country will be considered vulnerable for a further 12 months. After this period, the country will no longer be subject to Temporary Recommendations, unless the Committee has concerns based on the final report.

TEMPORARY RECOMMENDATIONS

States infected with WPV1, cVDPV1 or cVDPV3 with potential risk of international spread

WPV1

Afghanistan most recent detection 4 May 2022 Malawi most recent detection 19 November 2021 Mozambique most recent detection 25 March 2022 Pakistan most recent detection 15 May 2022

cVDPV1

Madagascar most recent detection 9 May 2022

cVDPV3

Israel most recent detection 24 March 2022

These countries should:

Officially declare, if not already done, at the level of head of state or government, that the interruption of poliovirus transmission is a national public health emergency and implement all required measures to support polio eradication; where such declaration has already been made, this emergency status should be maintained as long as the response is required.

Ensure that all residents and long­term visitors (i.e. > four weeks) of all ages, receive a dose of bivalent oral poliovirus vaccine (bOPV) or inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) between four weeks and 12 months prior to international travel.

Ensure that those undertaking urgent travel (i.e. within four weeks), who have not received a dose of bOPV or IPV in the previous four weeks to 12 months, receive a dose of polio vaccine at least by the time of departure as this will still provide benefit, particularly for frequent travelers.

Ensure that such travelers are provided with an International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis in the form specified in Annex 6 of the IHR to record their polio vaccination and serve as proof of vaccination.

Restrict at the point of departure the international travel of any resident lacking documentation of appropriate polio vaccination. These recommendations apply to international travelers from all points of departure, irrespective of the means of conveyance (e.g. road, air, sea).

Further intensify cross­border efforts by significantly improving coordination at the national, regional and local levels to substantially increase vaccination coverage of travelers crossing the border and of high risk cross­border populations. Improved coordination of cross­border efforts should include closer supervision and monitoring of the quality of vaccination at border transit points, as well as tracking of the proportion of travelers that are identified as unvaccinated after they have crossed the border.

Further intensify efforts to increase routine immunization coverage, including sharing coverage data, as high routine immunization coverage is an essential element of the polio eradication strategy, particularly as the world moves closer to eradication.

Maintain these measures until the following criteria have been met: (i) at least six months have passed without new infections and (ii) there is documentation of full application of high quality eradication activities in all infected and high risk areas; in the absence of such documentation these measures should be maintained until the state meets the above assessment criteria for being no longer infected.

Provide to the Director-General a regular report on the implementation of the Temporary Recommendations on international travel. States infected with cVDPV2, with or without evidence of local transmission: 1. Afghanistan most recent detection 9 Jul 2021 2. Benin most recent detection 9 September 2021 3. Burkina Faso most recent detection 9 June 2021 4. Cameroon most recent detection 29 October 2021 5. CAR most recent detection 4 May 2022 6. Chad most recent detection 25 March 2022 7. Côte d’Ivoire most recent detection 9 February 2022 8. DR Congo most recent detection 7 April 2022 9. Djibouti most recent detection 27 March 2022 10. Egypt most recent detection 28 April 2021 11. Eritrea most recent detection 3 September 2021 12. Ethiopia most recent detection 16 September 2021 13. Gambia most recent detection 9 September 2021 14. Ghana most recent detection 17 May 2022 15. Guinea most recent detection 3 August 2021 16. Guinea Bissau most recent detection 26 July 2021 17. Liberia most recent detection 28 May 2021 18. Mauritania most recent detection 3 November 2021 19. Mozambique most recent detection 26 March 2022 20. Niger most recent detection 18 April 2022 21. Nigeria most recent detection 16 April 2022 22. Pakistan most recent detection 11 August 2021 23. Senegal most recent detection 18 November 2021 24. Sierra Leone most recent detection 1 June 2021 25. Somalia most recent detection 10 March 2022 26. Togo most recent detection 22 March 2022 27. Uganda most recent detection 2 November 2021 28. Ukraine most recent detection 24 December 2021 29. Yemen most recent detection 3 March 2022 States that have had an importation of cVDPV2 but without evidence of local transmission should:
The Director-General of WHO is convening an Emergency Committee under Article 48 of the International Health Regulations in relation to the current outbreak of monkeypox virus. The meeting will take place on 23 June 2022 and is open only to members and advisors of the Emergency Committee.



The objectives of this meeting are to provide views to the Director-General of WHO on whether the event constitutes a public health emergency of international concern and also on proposed potential Temporary Recommendations.

List of participants (for the first meeting of the Committee of 23 June 2022)

Chair

Dr Jean-Marie Okwo-Bele - Public Health Consultant, national of the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Former Director of the Vaccines and Immunization Department, WHO headquarters, Geneva, Switzerland (Retired)

Co-chair

Dr Nicola Low - Associate Professor of Epidemiology and Public Health Medicine, Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Switzerland

Other members



Dr Daniel Bausch - Senior Director, Emerging Threats and Global Health Security, FIND, The Global Alliance for Diagnostics, Switzerland

Dr Clarissa Damaso - Associate Professor, Head, Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Viruses, Carlos Chagas Filho Biophysics Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Dr Inger Damon (Rapporteur) - Director, Division of High Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, United States of America

Dr Jake Dunning - Senior Researcher, Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, United Kingdom

Dr Ousmane Faye - Head, Virology Unit, Institut Pasteur de Dakar, Senegal

Dr Rinat Maksyutov - Director General, Federal Budgetary Research Institution – State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology VECTOR, Federal Service for Surveillance on Consumer Rights Protection and Human Wellbeing, Russian Federation

Dr Othoman Mellouk - Lead, Access to Diagnostics and Medicines, International Treatment Preparedness Coalition, Morocco

Dr Dimie Ogoina - Professor of Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Niger Delta University and Head of Infectious Diseases Unit, Niger Delta University Teaching Hospital, Bayelsa, Nigeria

Dr Nittaya Phanuphak - Executive Director, Institute of HIV Research and Innovation, Bangkok, Thailand

Dr Anne Rimoin - Professor of Epidemiology and Gordon-Levin Endowed Chair in Infectious Diseases and Public Health, Fielding School of Public Health, University of California, Los Angeles, United States of America

Dr Tomoya Saito - Director, Center for Emergency Preparedness and Response, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Japan

Dr Kathrin Summermatter - Head of Biosafety Center and Managing Director of the BSL3, Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of Berne, Switzerland

Dr Daniel Tarantola - Adjunct Research Professor, Institute on Inequalities in Global Health, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, United States of America and Former Director of the Vaccines and Immunization Department, WHO headquarters, Geneva, Switzerland (Retired)

Dr Zunyou Wu Chief Epidemiologist, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Director, Division of HIV Prevention, NCAIDS/China CDC, China and Adjunct Professor of Epidemiology, University of California, Los Angeles, United States

Advisors
Menstrual Health is firmly on the global agenda today.

Menstrual Health was not on the agenda of the International Conference on the Population and Development or the Millennium Declaration. Nor it is explicitly stated in the Sustainable Development Goals targets for goals 3 (health), 5 (gender equality) or 6 (water and sanitation). However, it has been placed on the global health, education, human rights, and gender equality/equity agendas by grass-roots workers and activists from the global South, drawing attention to reports of women’s and girls’ experiences of shame and embarrassment, and the barriers they face in managing their period because they do not have the means to do so, with consequences for their life opportunities including their rights to education, work, water and sanitation, non-discrimination and gender equality – and ultimately to health. WHO salutes the grass-roots workers and activists, notably those from the global South, who have doggedly championed menstrual health, and welcomes the inclusion of Menstrual Health in the Human Rights Council agenda.

WHO calls for menstrual Health to be recognized, framed and addressed as a health and human rights issue, not a hygiene issue:

WHO calls for three actions. Firstly, to recognize and frame menstruation as a health issue, not a hygiene issue – a health issue with physical, psychological, and social dimensions, and one that needs to be addressed in the perspective of a life course – from before menarche to after menopause. Secondly, to recognize that menstrual health means that women and girls and other people who menstruate, have access to information and education about it; to the menstrual products they need; water, sanitation, and disposal facilities; to competent and empathic care when needed; to live, study and work in an environment in which menstruation is seen as positive and healthy not something to be ashamed of; and to fully participate in work and social activities. Thirdly, to ensure that these activities are included in the relevant sectoral work plans and budgets, and their performance is measured.

WHO recognizes that several sectors have equally important roles to play in promoting and safeguarding Menstrual Health and is committed to stepping up its efforts to encourage health policymakers and programme managers to engage with these sectors to promote the rights of women, girls and other people who menstruate and meet their comprehensive menstrual health needs, especially in humanitarian contexts. WHO is also committed to breaking the silence and stigma associated with menstruation and to make schools, health facilities and other workplaces (including WHO’s workplaces), menstruation responsive.

Governments are beginning to act, but they need to do much more.

Activists – including young people - and nongovernmental organizations have done much to place menstrual health on the agenda. A growing number of governments are taking action. Some governments have removed taxes on menstrual products. Others have focused on the challenges faced by school-going adolescents in obtaining menstrual products. Still others have put in place strategies to provide menstrual products to populations in difficult circumstances e.g., those who are homeless or those who are incarcerated. Finally, a handful of countries have put in place laws and policies for medical leave when one is experiencing pain, discomfort and other symptoms and signs related to menstruation. These are useful steps, but governments could and should do more than improve access to menstrual products. They should make schools, workplaces and public institutions supportive of managing menstruation with comfort and dignity. More importantly, they should normalize menstruation and break the silence around it. Finally, in the context of what is happening in Ethiopia, Ukraine, and elsewhere, governments should include an attention to menstruation as part of a broader Sexual and Reproductive Health response in those who are displaced because of war or natural calamities.
A new app for mobile phones that provides localized information on ultraviolet (UV) radiation levels has been launched by the World Health Organization (WHO), the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the International Labour Organization (ILO). The SunSmart Global UV app provides five-day UV and weather forecasts at searchable locations. It highlights time slots when sun protection is required with the aim of helping people around the world know when to use sun protection, in an effort to reduce the global burden of skin cancer and UV-related eye damage.

The SunSmart Global UV app is available free of charge at both the Apple App and Google Play stores. It provides personalized options so that users can take actions to protect prolonged, excessive UV exposure, a major cause of skin cancer and other UV related diseases. The app allows the inclusion of national and local data streams and adaptation to multiple languages – it is currently available in Chinese, English, French, German, Russian, Dutch and Spanish.

“Evidence shows that overexposure to UV is the major cause of skin cancer. So it’s vital for people to know when and how to protect themselves,” said Dr Maria Neira, WHO Director, Department of Environment, Climate Change and Health. ”We encourage everyone to use the application to protect themselves and their children, and to make this a daily habit.”

Globally, it is estimated that over 1.5 million cases of skin cancer (melanoma and non-melanoma combined) were diagnosed globally in 2020. During the same period, more than 120,000 people across the world lost their lives to this highly preventable disease. One of the main factors contributing to these cancers is excess UV radiation from thinning of the earth’s stratospheric ozone layer resulting from the release of certain manmade chemicals. Under the international treaty known as the Montreal Protocol, all UN Member States are phasing out the production and consumption of those substances according to a specific timetable. As a result of these continuing efforts, the ozone level is projected to recover by mid-century. In the meantime, individuals need to be particularly cautious to protect themselves from receiving too much UV exposure - this is where the UV app plays an important awareness role.

“The Montreal Protocol protects the stratospheric ozone layer which, in turn, protects human health and the environment by blocking most of sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation from reaching the earth’s surface. Skin cancer can result from overexposure to the sun, so it is imperative for everyone to remain vigilant and ensure they protect themselves adequately with hats and sunscreen. The SunSmart App is a fantastic UV monitoring tool, and I would encourage everyone to use it,” advises Ms. Meg Seki, Executive Secretary of UNEP's Ozone Secretariat.

Everyone needs some sun, mainly for the production of vitamin D which helps to prevent the development of bone diseases such as rickets, osteomalacia and osteoporosis. But too much sun can be dangerous – and even deadly. The summer months hide real danger.



The UV App has been launched to coincide with the first day of summer in the northern hemisphere. By increasing the public’s awareness and helping to reduce the incidence of skin cancer, this application ultimately supports the achievement of UN Sustainable Development Goal 3, which aims to ensure healthy lives and well-being worldwide by 2030.

“This app combines meteorological, environmental and health expertise to help protect people from the sun both at work and in their leisure. It is unique because it uses data from country-level weather and UV measuring stations to provide accurate and location-specific UV Index readings,” said WMO Secretary-General Professor Petteri Taalas. “It is a great example of science serving society.”

Much of UV-related illness and death can be avoided through a set of simple prevention measures:

Limit time in the midday sun

Seek shade when UV rays are most intense

Wear protective clothing, hats and sunglasses

Use a broad-spectrum sunscreen of sun protection

Protecting children from extended periods in the sun is particularly important as excessive sun exposure during these early years can significantly increase the risk of UV related diseases later in life.

“This app is a useful tool to assist companies and workers in identifying hazardous work and planning safety and health measures. The International Labour Conference adopted on 10 June a Resolution recognizing a safe and healthy work environment as a new Fundamental Principle and Right at Work. It is a global call for increased efforts to prevent work-related injuries and diseases. Tools such as SunSmart Global UV are a small but useful contribution to this endeavour,” said Vera Paquete-Perdigão, Director of the ILO’s Governance and Tripartism, Department.

UV Index

The app is based on the UV Index, which describes the level of solar UV radiation at the earth’s surface. The UV Index is reported on a scale of 1 (or “Low”) to 11 and higher (or “Extreme”). The higher the index value, the greater the potential for damage to the skin and eye, and the less time it takes for harm to occur. The maximum UV Index is at the solar noon when the sun is highest in the sky. Adapting outdoor activities and using sun protection are recommended when the UV Index is 3 or above. UV damage is cumulative and UV can be harmful when people are exposed for long periods – even at low levels.

The app seeks to bring worldwide consistency to UV reporting and public health messaging. It was developed by the Cancer Council Victoria and the Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency, both WHO Collaborating Centres in Australia where a similar app demonstrated improved UV protection public awareness when it was used to support a decades-long, systematic public health campaign promoting sun-smart behaviour.

The Global Solar UV Index was developed jointly by the World Health Organization (WHO), the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) and the German Federal Office for Radiation Protection (Bundesamt für Strahlenschutz, BfS) to inform and alert the general public of the potential health risk associated with high UV solar radiation levels.






Key messages:

Current COVID-19 vaccines, which are based on the ancestral strain of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, continue to exhibit strong protection against severe disease and death across all virus variants seen to date . Achieving high coverage rates with the primary series and first booster doses in the highest and high priority-use groups in every country remains the priority.

. Achieving high coverage rates with the primary series and first booster doses in the highest and high priority-use groups in every country remains the priority. However, the emergence of variants of concerns has resulted in a rapid decline of the protection against symptomatic illness. There is therefore a need to assess whether variant-updated COVID-19 vaccines, especially to Omicron, would improve vaccine performance . Such vaccines should aim to provide even greater and more durable protection against severe disease and death, and broader protection against future variants that may be even more antigenically distant to the index virus.

. Such vaccines should aim to provide even greater and more durable protection against severe disease and death, and broader protection against future variants that may be even more antigenically distant to the index virus. Variant-updated vaccines are under clinical development and will in due course be assessed by regulatory authorities. Once these vaccines have received WHO emergency use authorization or approval by a stringent national regulatory authority, they will be considered by SAGE for policy recommendations. Policy recommendations will address different use-case scenarios for Omicron-updated vaccines and include consideration of programmatic aspects.

Policy recommendations will address different use-case scenarios for Omicron-updated vaccines and include consideration of programmatic aspects. The full public health benefit of variant-updated vaccines and their value proposition over current vaccines can only be quantified once vaccine effectiveness data have been obtained.

The World Health Organization (WHO) with support of Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization and its COVID-19 Vaccines Working Group, continues to review the emerging evidence on variant-updated vaccines. This statement reflects the current understanding of variants of concern (VOC) and variant-updated vaccines and highlights the gaps in evidence and potential implications for vaccination strategies.



This statement is not a policy recommendation. A policy recommendation will be issued when sufficient data are available on the properties of variant-updated vaccines compared to those based on the ancestral strain. Initially, human data will likely be available for variant-updated versions of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines and be limited to safety and immunogenicity studies. An interim policy recommendation is likely to be based initially on a characterization of the immune response. Considerations would include the magnitude, duration and breadth of the immune response against a range of VOC, and inferred protection against infection, various other clinical endpoints, and safety. Evidence on vaccine effectiveness (VE) against symptomatic illness and severe disease is expected to become available only when variant-updated vaccines have been introduced into broader use. Policy recommendations for variant-updated vaccines will consider formulations (monovalent or bivalent with the ancestral strain), programmatic issues, evidence or likelihood of improved public health impact, and potential risk mitigation against future variants. WHO anticipates that initial recommendations will be constrained by significant data limitations; therefore, post-approval data on safety and effectiveness will be essential to quantify the performance of variant-updated vaccines, and to refine recommendations.



Background

Currently available COVID-19 vaccines are based on the index virus (also referred to as the ancestral strain); however, there has been continuous and substantial SARS CoV-2 viral evolution, particularly in the spike (S) protein. These genomic changes in the virus have resulted in several VOC that have circulated in waves, with varying degrees of immune evasion, some of which have resulted in lower VE of existing COVID-19 vaccines compared to the initial VE against the index virus. The magnitude of the reduction in VE varies by product, schedule, disease outcome, VOC and time since last dose. From January to June 2022, the dominant SARS-CoV-2 variant globally has been the Omicron variant, with emergence of additional sub-lineages (1). The Omicron variant is the most antigenically distinct variant from the index virus and has exhibited the highest degree of immune evasion to current COVID-19 vaccines, compared to the index virus. Current vaccines continue to perform well in preventing severe disease and death due to Omicron, particularly with the use of a booster dose(s). However, protection against infection and symptomatic illness due to the Omicron variant is lower than other variants and declines rapidly, even after a third (booster) dose. Those at highest risk for severe disease, hospitalization, and death remain older persons, those with comorbidities and immunocompromising conditions, and other vulnerable populations as described in the WHO Prioritization Roadmap (2).



Rationale for updating SARS CoV-2 antigen composition in COVID-19 vaccines

The rationale for developing and implementing variant-updated vaccines is to enhance the magnitude, duration, and breadth of immunity afforded by COVID-19 vaccines to enhance public health impact now and in the future, and to mitigate social and economic risks of infection and disease due to SARS CoV-2. While current COVID-19 vaccines have maintained high protection against severe disease and death across all variants seen to date, the objective of variant- updated vaccines would be to provide first, even greater and more durable protection against severe disease and death, and second, to provide broader protection against future variants that are even more antigenically distant to the index virus. These latter two objectives could prevent spread to vulnerable people and reduce the risk of emergence of new variants. Improved protection against symptomatic illness and even transmission would be an additional desired benefit.



Technical Advisory Group on COVID-19 Vaccine Composition

The WHO Technical Advisory Group on COVID-19 Vaccine Composition (TAG-CO-VAC) is a group of independent experts which assesses the public health implications of emerging SARS-CoV-2 VOC on the performance of COVID-19 vaccines in order to issue timely recommendations on potential modifications to vaccine strain composition. In its most recent statement, WHO’s TAG-CO-VAC has highlighted that the use of currently licensed vaccines (i.e. those based on the index virus) with a booster dose confers high levels of protection against severe disease and death for all variants, including Omicron. TAG-CO-VAC also reaffirmed that the continued use of currently licensed vaccines for primary vaccination and as a booster dose is appropriate to achieve the primary goals of COVID-19 vaccination. At the same time, eliciting immunity against as broad a range of S protein variants as possible is desirable to retain and potentially improve protection against future variants. Current evidence shows that repeated exposure to SARS-CoV-2 antigens (either through breakthrough infection following vaccination, vaccination following infection, or with ≥ 3 vaccine doses) improves the magnitude and breadth of the antibody response.

There is great uncertainty as to the timing of emergence, extent of global circulation and antigenic characteristics of future variants, but emergence of new variants seems highly likely based on experience to date. The TAG-CO-VAC has advised that the inclusion of Omicron in the composition of an updated vaccine has the potential to elicit a greater breadth of immune response against Omicron, and potentially enhance protection against infection and milder disease due to emerging variants, while retaining and possibly enhancing protection against severe disease. For these reasons, the potential benefit of Omicron updated vaccines should be studied. The TAG-CO-VAC also advised that immune responses to an Omicron-specific vaccine are likely to differ according to an individual’s COVID-19 primary series vaccination status. As a booster dose, an Omicron-specific monovalent vaccine may elicit greater breadth in the immune response than index virus-based vaccine(s). However, when used for the primary series, an Omicron-specific monovalent vaccine is not likely to confer as broad protection as current index virus-based vaccine and is therefore not advised at the current time.



Use-case scenarios

To complement the TAG-CO-VAC statement, SAGE will consider different use-case scenarios for an Omicron-updated vaccine once such a vaccine has received WHO emergency use listing or emergency use authorization by a stringent regulatory authority and as per its mandate to provide policy recommendations. Use-case scenarios will depend on the vaccine’s characteristics, performance, programmatic requirements, and epidemiological settings. Potential use-case scenarios include bivalent versus monovalent vaccines, and will be guided by WHO’s roadmap on prioritizing uses of COVID-19 vaccines.

Increasing vaccine coverage rates and high exposure to Omicron have led to increasing population-level immunity in many countries. Infection and vaccine use has led to a high degree of hybrid immunity (i.e., population-level immunity from both vaccine- and infection-induced immune responses) (3). However, the resulting degree and duration of protective immunity remains uncertain. Variant-updated vaccines can potentially restore individual and broader population-level protection.

Optimal timing of variant-updated boosters will depend on various factors. For example, surges of COVID-19 over the past two years have been attributed to factors including the relaxation of public health and social measures, emergence of new variants, and insufficient vaccine coverage rates. It will likely continue to be difficult to predict the timing of future surges. If supported by data, rollout of variant-updated booster doses might initially be limited to more vulnerable populations as outlined in the WHO SAGE Roadmap(2).



Other considerations for the introduction of variant-updated vaccines:

Introducing new variant-updated vaccines may add complexity and costs to vaccine programmes. Having multiple products in a vaccine programme, some of which are restricted only for boosters while others are for primary series will create substantial complexity for vaccinators, supply chain planning, documentation of individual vaccination status, safety monitoring, programme performance assessments, communication, and community demand. To date, vaccine uptake tends to decline with every additional COVID-19 vaccine dose that is recommended as part of the schedule. However, variant-updated vaccines with superior and broader immunity revert this trend.



Conclusions

WHO will continue to review the COVID-19 epidemiology, genomic surveillance, phenotypic characteristics, vaccine product development evidence, and vaccine effectiveness data, including with respect to variant-updated vaccines if and when these are introduced. The first human immunogenicity data on the Omicron variant vaccines have been announced in June 2022. WHO will issue policy recommendations for different use-case scenarios for an Omicron-updated vaccine once such a vaccine has received WHO emergency use listing or emergency use authorization by a stringent regulatory authority. Relative benefits and risks, cost-effectiveness and programmatic considerations will all need to be considered.

Current vaccines continue to exhibit strong protection against severe disease and death, and therefore achieving high coverage rates with the primary series and first booster doses in the highest and high priority-use groups in every country remains the priority. As we await data on variant-updated vaccines and assess their relative merit, the performance of existing vaccines can be optimized by using additional doses of current vaccines in priority-use groups (4) and by using heterologous schedules (5) as has previously been recommended by SAGE.



-------------------------------------------------

References:


Key messages:

The primary goals of COVID-19 vaccination using currently licensed vaccines continue to be to reduce hospitalization, severe disease and death, and to protect health systems. The use of currently licensed vaccines based on the index virus (i.e. the virus that was identified from the first cases of COVID-19 in December 2019) confers high levels of protection against severe disease outcomes for all variants, including Omicron with a booster dose.

for all variants, including Omicron with a booster dose. There has been continuous and substantial virus evolution since SARS-CoV-2 emerged in late 2019 and it is likely that this evolution will continue, resulting in the emergence of new variants, particularly those with changes in the spike protein. The trajectory of SARS-CoV-2 evolution remains uncertain and the genetic and antigenic characteristics of future variants cannot yet be predicted.

Given the uncertainties of further evolution, it may be prudent to pursue an additional objective of COVID-19 vaccination of achieving broader immunity against circulating and emerging variants while retaining protection against severe disease and death.

against circulating and emerging variants while Available data (see Annex) indicate that the inclusion of Omicron, as the most antigenically distinct SARS-CoV-2 Variant of Concern, in an updated vaccine composition may be beneficial if administered as a booster dose to those who have already received a COVID-19 vaccination primary series.

The Technical Advisory Group on COVID-19 Vaccine Composition (TAG-CO-VAC) is an independent group of experts that has continued to assess the public health implications of emerging SARS-CoV-2 Variants of Concern (VOC) on the performance of COVID-19 vaccines in order to issue timely recommendations on potential modifications to vaccine strain composition. Since the designation of the Omicron VOC by the World Health Organization (WHO) in November 2021, the TAG-CO-VAC has closely followed the impact of Omicron on the performance of currently licensed COVID-19 vaccines to consider whether a change in COVID-19 vaccine composition may be warranted­­­. Further to the interim statement published on 8 March 2022, this TAG-CO-VAC statement is intended to offer Member States, vaccine developers and regulatory authorities considerations as to whether a modified vaccine composition may be warranted and, if so, how this may be achieved to fulfil the public health objectives of COVID-19 vaccination.

Is a modified COVID-19 vaccine composition warranted?

Since the classification of Omicron as a VOC, there has been rapid and relatively synchronous displacement of other circulating variants by Omicron that has caused substantial epidemic waves in all 6 WHO regions. Omicron is characterized by a large number of mutations, including many in antigenically important regions of the spike (S) protein. Its transmission advantage over other variants has largely been driven by immune escape properties, and Omicron has infected many who had been previously vaccinated and/or infected. Several sublineages within Omicron, notably BA.1, BA.2, BA.3, BA.4 and BA.5, have been identified, which share many of the same S protein mutations.



In this context, the primary goals of COVID-19 vaccination using currently licensed vaccines continue to be to reduce hospitalization, severe disease and death, and to protect health systems. A primary series of currently licensed vaccines based on the virus that was identified from the first cases of COVID-19 in December 2019 (termed the index virus e.g. GISAID: hCoV-19/Wuhan/WIV04/2019) confers lower levels of protection against severe disease outcomes for Omicron, compared to prior VOCs. However, a booster dose of the currently licensed COVID-19 vaccines based on the index virus appears to restore protection against severe disease and death against currently circulating variants (1) at levels that remain acceptable (2).



Nevertheless, there has been substantial virus evolution, particularly in the S protein, since the first cases of COVID-19 and it is likely that this evolution will continue, resulting in the emergence of new variants in the future. There is uncertainty about the timing of the emergence, extent of global circulation and antigenic characteristics of future variants. In this context, immunity elicited against as broad a range of SARS-CoV-2 S protein antigens as possible may be desirable to retain and potentially improve protection against future variants. Therefore, it may be prudent to pursue an additional objective of COVID-19 vaccination to achieve immune responses that both:

elicit a greater breadth in the immune response against circulating and emerging variants , to enhance protection against these variants; and

, to enhance protection against these variants; and retain protection against hospitalization, severe disease and death, and protecting health systems.

As such, a modified COVID-19 vaccine composition may be warranted to broaden immune protection against divergent SARS-CoV-2 S protein antigens.



If a modified COVID-19 vaccine composition is deemed to be necessary, what is the recommended strain composition of the vaccine?



The TAG-CO-VAC has considered the comparative epidemiological and virological characteristics of VOCs to date, including Omicron. This included, but was not limited to, published and unpublished data on the antigenic characteristics and antibody escape of various VOCs including Omicron, the cross-protection of Omicron specific responses following vaccination or infection with prior VOCs, and following Omicron infection and/or Omicron-specific vaccine candidates (see Annex). Importantly, the TAG-CO-VAC acknowledges that at this time, limited animal model and human data have been published on Omicron-specific vaccine candidates, and these will continue to be reviewed as more data become available.



Omicron is the most antigenically distinct SARS-CoV-2 VOC to have spread globally – much more so than Alpha, or Delta, which are more antigenically similar to the index virus. This has been demonstrated by the substantially reduced neutralization activity against Omicron as compared to earlier VOCs, both in vaccinated individuals and in those who had been previously infected with earlier VOCs. Furthermore, antibody responses in previously naïve (unprimed) individuals exposed to Omicron are strong, but they do not cross-react well with previous variants, including other VOCs. In contrast, in individuals who have been previously primed by SARS-CoV-2 infection (i.e., index virus, Alpha, Delta) or COVID-19 vaccination (based on the index virus), infection with Omicron elicits a broadly cross-reactive antibody response. Similar observations have also been seen in animal models and preliminary clinical data in humans assessing Omicron-specific vaccine candidates. Collectively, the data show that repeated exposure to SARS-CoV-2 antigens (either through breakthrough infection, vaccination following infection, or ≥ 3 vaccine doses) enhances the magnitude of the antibody response and an increase in breadth is observed after Omicron infection in previously primed humans.



Therefore, available data indicate that the inclusion of Omicron in an updated vaccine composition is likely to be beneficial in populations that have already received a COVID-19 vaccination primary series. For an Omicron-specific vaccine product, the TAG-CO-VAC recognizes that viruses or viral genetic sequences very closely related to hCoV/South Africa/NICD-N21668/2021 or hCoV/USA/CA-CDC-4358237-001/2021 are some of the most antigenically distant from the index virus to date and are likely to enhance the magnitude and breadth of the antibody response.



Importantly, the TAG-CO-VAC considers that the protection offered by an Omicron-specific vaccine product is likely to differ in those who have already received a COVID-19 vaccine primary series (primed), as compared to those who have not (unprimed). Based on the data to date, it is inferred that an Omicron-specific monovalent vaccine product administered as a booster dose for those who have already received a primary vaccine series may elicit greater breadth in the immune response. In contrast, an Omicron-specific monovalent vaccine product as a standalone formulation for the primary series is not advised as it is not yet known whether Omicron-specific vaccines will offer similar cross-reactive immunity and cross-protection from severe illness caused by other VOCs in unprimed individuals as the index virus-based vaccines have done.



Although bi- or multivalent products have yet to be approved by regulatory authorities, vaccines containing index virus and Omicron in a single product may be able to achieve similar outcomes as the proposed sequential approach. However, at this time, only limited data are available to assess whether the cross-reactive immune responses in humans using an Omicron-containing bi/multivalent product will be equivalent to those elicited with a sequential vaccine approach.



The TAG-CO-VAC recognizes that the inclusion of Omicron, as the most antigenically distinct VOC to date, in a variant-specific formulation and administered as a booster dose, does not preclude the consideration of other variant-specific formulations by regulatory authorities. The key additional objective of modified COVID-19 vaccine formulations is to achieve breadth of cross-reactive immunity to previous, currently circulating and/or emerging variants.



Conclusion

The use of currently licensed vaccines based on the index virus confers high levels of protection against severe disease outcomes for all variants, including Omicron with a booster dose. As such, the continued use of currently licensed vaccines for primary vaccination and as a booster dose is appropriate to achieve the primary goals of COVID-19 vaccination. Given the uncertainties of the genetic and antigenic characteristics of future SARS-CoV-2 variants, it may be prudent to pursue an additional objective of COVID-19 vaccination of achieving a greater breadth in the antibody response against circulating and emerging variants, while retaining protection against severe disease and death. In this context, available data indicate that the inclusion of Omicron, as the most antigenically distinct SARS-CoV-2 VOC, in an updated vaccine composition may be beneficial. Available data also indicate that this would be best administered as a booster dose to those who have already received a COVID-19 vaccination primary series, if such vaccines were to be made available.



The TAG-CO-VAC acknowledges that this position is based on limited data from animal models, inference from Omicron infection in primed and unprimed individuals, and preliminary clinical data in humans vaccinated with an Omicron vaccine candidate. The TAG-CO-VAC therefore recognizes that considerable uncertainties remain. Firstly, uncertainty in the trajectory of SARS-CoV-2 evolution is such that there is a risk that this update may not align with variants that emerge in the future. However, a modified vaccine composition that includes Omicron will likely broaden the antibody response in primed individuals. Secondly, there are assumptions as to the potential performance of variant-specific vaccines, including Omicron-containing vaccines. It is assumed that the safety, reactogenicity and immunogenicity of the updated vaccine composition will be comparable to those of the currently licensed vaccines based on the index virus. The TAG-CO-VAC therefore strongly encourages the generation of clinical data on immune responses in humans to a primary series and/or booster dose of Omicron-specific vaccines, across different vaccine platforms. These additional data may then be considered by TAG-CO-VAC and will allow the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization and its COVID-19 Vaccines Working Group to issue policy recommendations on the use and timing of Omicron-specific vaccines.





The statement reflects the current vaccine performance and landscape of licensed COVID-19 vaccines as of June 2022. The statement will therefore be updated as further data become available.

_________________________________________

1. WHO. COVID-19 Weekly Epidemiological Update. 8 June 2022. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/weekly-epidemiological-update-on-covid-19---8-june-2022
The World Health Organization today released its largest review of world mental health since the turn of the century. The detailed work provides a blueprint for governments, academics, health professionals, civil society and others with an ambition to support the world in transforming mental health.

In 2019, nearly a billion people – including 14% of the world’s adolescents – were living with a mental disorder. Suicide accounted for more than 1 in 100 deaths and 58% of suicides occurred before age 50. Mental disorders are the leading cause of disability, causing 1 in 6 years lived with disability. People with severe mental health conditions die on average 10 to 20 years earlier than the general population, mostly due to preventable physical diseases. Childhood sexual abuse and bullying victimization are major causes of depression. Social and economic inequalities, public health emergencies, war, and the climate crisis are among the global, structural threats to mental health. Depression and anxiety went up by more than 25% in the first year of the pandemic alone.

Stigma, discrimination and human rights violations against people with mental health conditions are widespread in communities and care systems everywhere; 20 countries still criminalize attempted suicide. Across countries, it is the poorest and most disadvantaged in society who are at greatest risk of mental ill-health and who are also the least likely to receive adequate services.

Even before the COVID-19 pandemic, just a small fraction of people in need had access to effective, affordable and quality mental health care. For example, 71% of those with psychosis worldwide do not receive mental health services. While 70% of people with psychosis are reported to be treated in high-income countries, only 12% of people with psychosis receive mental health care in low-income countries. For depression, the gaps in service coverage are wide across all countries: even in high-income countries, only one third of people with depression receive formal mental health care and minimally-adequate treatment for depression is estimated to range from 23% in high-income countries to 3% in low- and lower-middle-income countries.

Drawing on the latest evidence available, showcasing examples of good practice, and voicing people’s lived experience, WHO’s comprehensive report highlights why and where change is most needed and how it can best be achieved. It calls on all stakeholders to work together to deepen the value and commitment given to mental health, reshape the environments that influence mental health and strengthen the systems that care for people’s mental health.

WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said, “Everyone’s life touches someone with a mental health condition. Good mental health translates to good physical health and this new report makes a compelling case for change. The inextricable links between mental health and public health, human rights and socioeconomic development mean that transforming policy and practice in mental health can deliver real, substantive benefits for individuals, communities and countries everywhere. Investment into mental health is an investment into a better life and future for all.”

All 194 WHO Member States have signed up to the Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030, which commits them to global targets for transforming mental health. Pockets of progress achieved over the past decade prove that change is possible. But change is not happening fast enough, and the story of mental health remains one of need and neglect with 2 out of 3 dollars of scarce government spending on mental health allocated to stand-alone psychiatric hospitals rather than community-based mental health services where people are best served. For decades mental health has been one of the most overlooked areas of public health, receiving a tiny part of the attention and resources it needs and deserves.

Dévora Kestel, Director of WHO’s Mental Health and Substance Use Department called for change: “Every country has ample opportunity to make meaningful progress towards better mental health for its population. Whether developing stronger mental health policies and laws, covering mental health in insurance schemes, developing or strengthening community mental health services or integrating mental health into general health care, schools, and prisons, the many examples in this report show that the strategic changes can make a big difference.”

The report urges all countries to accelerate their implementation of the Comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2030. It makes several recommendations for action, which are grouped into 3 paths to transformation that focus on shifting attitudes to mental health, addressing risks to mental health and strengthening systems of care for mental health. They are:

1. Deepen the value and commitment we give to mental health. For example:

Stepping up investments in mental health, not just by securing appropriate funds and human resources across health and other sectors to meet mental health needs, but also through committed leadership, pursuing evidence-based policies and practice, and establishing robust information and monitoring systems.

Including people with mental health conditions in all aspects of society and decision-making to overcome stigma and discrimination, reduce disparities and promote social justice.

2. Reshape environments that influence mental health, including homes, communities, schools, workplaces, health care services, natural environments. For example:

Intensifying engagement across sectors, including to understand the social and structural determinants of mental health and intervening in ways that reduce risks, build resilience and dismantle barriers that stop people with mental health conditions participating fully in society.

Implementing concrete actions to improve environments for mental health such as stepping up action against intimate partner violence and abuse and neglect of children and older people; enabling nurturing care for early childhood development, making available livelihood support for people with mental health conditions, introducing social and emotional learning programmes while countering bullying in schools, shifting attitudes and strengthen rights in mental health care, increasing access to green spaces, and banning highly hazardous pesticides that are associated with one fifth of all suicides in the world.



3. Strengthen mental health care by changing where, how, and by whom mental health care is delivered and received.

Building community-based networks of interconnected services that move away from custodial care in psychiatric hospitals and cover a spectrum of care and support through a combination of mental health services that are integrated in general health care; community mental health services; and services beyond the health sector.

Diversifying and scaling up care options for common mental health conditions such as depression and anxiety, which has a 5 to 1 benefit–cost ratio. Such scale up includes adopting a task-sharing approach that expands the evidence-based care to be offered also by general health workers and community providers. It also includes using digital technologies to support guided and unguided self-help and to deliver remote care.
A new, open, transparent sublicence agreement between the Medicines Patent Pool (MPP) on behalf of C-TAP, and South African pharmaceutical company Biotech Africa will accelerate the manufacture and sale of a COVID-19 serological antibody technology around the world.



The World Health Organization welcomes the sublicence agreement, the first of its kind to be signed under the auspices of the WHO’s COVID-19 Technology Access Pool (C-TAP) initiative. C-TAP was set up in 2020 to facilitate the timely, equitable and affordable access to COVID-19 health products.



The new agreement builds on a licensing agreement announced by WHO and MPP last year with Spain’s National Research Council (CSIC). The non-exclusive sublicence allows Biotech to manufacture and commercialize CSIC’s COVID-19 serological test worldwide.



“The most effective way to get – and keep – ahead of COVID-19 is to keep testing,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “This new agreement means we can take advantage of untapped manufacturing capacity so more people in more countries can have easier access to affordable diagnostics.”



The test effectively checks for the presence of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies developed either in response to a COVID-19 infection or to a vaccine. The agreement covers all related patents and the biological material needed to manufacture the test. CSIC will provide all know-how to Biotech as well as training. The licence will be royalty-free for low- and middle-income countries and will remain valid until the date the last patent expires.



“BioTech Africa is honoured to have been selected to be the first biotechnology company in Africa to collaborate with C-TAP in order to facilitate the local manufacture of affordable COVID-19 surveillance devices,” said Jenny Leslie, Biotech Africa Chief Operations Officer.



“This recognition is a product of our perseverance and dedication to become a global player in the manufacture of the highest quality recombinant proteins. The signing of this agreement emphasizes the company’s ongoing goal to support diagnostics needs around the world,” Leslie said.



“We are thrilled to see the COVID-19 Technology Access Pool initiative bearing fruits with the goal of providing equitable access to life-saving health products for the world´s most vulnerable people,” said Charles Gore, MPP Executive Director.



Launched in 2020 by the WHO Director-General and the President of Costa Rica, and supported by 44 WHO Member States, C-TAP aims to facilitate timely, equitable and affordable access to COVID-19 health products by boosting their production and supply through open, non-exclusive licensing agreements.

The C-TAP platform provides a global one-stop-shop for developers of COVID-19 therapeutics, diagnostics, vaccines and other priority health technologies to share knowledge and data and license their intellectual property to additional manufacturers through public health-driven, voluntary, non-exclusive and transparent licences.

By pooling technologies, developers of COVID-19 health products can boost manufacturing capacity in all regions and expand access to life-saving tools.
In less than a month, the Security Council resolution that allows the United Nations and our implementing partners to provide lifesaving humanitarian aid to northwest Syria from across the border with Türkiye will expire.

The 15-member Security Council will decide whether to renew it or not.



This decision is critical for the lives and wellbeing of 4.1 million people trapped in the non-Government-controlled northwest of Syria bordering Türkiye. Many rely on humanitarian aid to survive, especially people who are displaced. Some 80% of those in need are women and children. Over 3.2 million people are food insecure and need food assistance.



Our priority and only goal is to get humanitarian aid to families who need it in the safest, most direct and efficient way, away from political calculations or agendas. Last year alone, critical aid from the UN and our partners crossed the border into northwest Syria helping and protecting 2.4 million people each month.



Over the past year, we were able to send convoys from Government-controlled areas of Syria across internal frontlines into northwest Syria with nutrition, health, food and education supplies for more than 40 000 people. That is welcome progress, and we continue to increase these deliveries. However, much more is needed.



In addition to the important assistance provided via convoys, affected people also need comprehensive access to basic services.

We urge the members of the Security Council to renew UN Security Council Resolution 2585, authorizing continued cross-border assistance for an additional 12 months. We must also secure regular access to northwest Syria from Government-controlled areas. We must increase the number of channels of humanitarian assistance and maximize humanitarian access.



Failure to renew the resolution will have dire humanitarian consequences. It will immediately disrupt the UN’s lifesaving aid operation, plunging people in northwest Syria into deeper misery and threatening their access to the food, medical care, clean water, shelter and protection from gender-based violence currently offered by UN-backed operations.



Over the years, funding for this lifeline operation has been dwindling. Amid other critical crises globally, we call for predictable funding to support the delivery of assistance to northwest Syria.



The lives of millions of people depend on it.



We are counting on members of the Security Council to enable our vital work to continue. The people of Syria will be counting on them to make the right choice.

-------

Signed by

Martin Griffiths, Emergency Relief Coordinator, OCHA

Catherine Russell, Executive Director, UNICEF

Natalia Kanem, Executive Director, UNFPA

António Vitorino, Director General, IOM

David Beasley, Executive Director, WFP

Filippo Grande, High Commissioner, UNHCR

Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director General, WHO

For further information, please contact:



Jens Laerke, OCHA, +41 79 472 97 50, [email protected]



Malene Jensen, UNICEF, +1 917 470 2019, [email protected]



Eddie Wright, UNFPA, +1 917 831 2074, [email protected]



Paul Dillon, IOM, +41 79 636 98 74, [email protected]

Abeer Etefa, WFP Cairo, +20 106 6634352, [email protected]

Shaza Moghraby, WFP New York, +1 929 289 9867 [email protected]



In Amman: Rula Amin, UNHCR/Amman, [email protected] +962790045849

In Geneva: Mathew Saltmarsh, UNHCR Geneva, [email protected] +41799679936

[email protected]

Christian Lindmeier, WHO, +41 22 791 2222
One of the major obstacles to the access of health products, including vaccines, is the delay in their approval by regulatory authorities after submission of product applications by manufacturers. Poor quality submissions and inadequate data provided by manufacturers have been identified as main obstacles by regulatory authorities. This workshop, organized by the WHO Local Production and Assistance Unit, aims to enhance the understanding and promote best practices amongst manufacturers, particularly in low- and middle-income countries, on quality requirements for vaccines as described in the guidelines of WHO and other regulatory authorities for prequalification and licensing purposes.

This workshop is taking place virtually from 28 June to 1st July 2022, and is intended for vaccine manufacturers, developers and manufacturers intending to produce vaccines, and will benefit technical personnel working in Production, Quality Control, Quality Assurance and Regulatory Affairs. National Regulatory Authorities and officials from related government ministries are welcome to participate.

Objectives:

1. Building participants’ understanding of the current quality requirements as described in WHO guidelines and relevant guidelines of other regulatory bodies

2. Formatting of regulatory documentation

3. Discussing approaches to formulating responses to assessment reports through a case study

4. Reviewing challenges and constraints faced by new manufacturers and exploring approaches to address them Intended.

For more information, please contact the LPA Unit Secretariat at: [email protected]




After 100 days of war, Ukraine’s health system is under severe pressure and the World Health Organization (WHO) has increased its presence, both in Ukraine and in those countries hosting displaced Ukrainians, to help meet the escalating health needs.

“This war has gone on for 100 days too many, shattering lives and communities, and imperilling the short- and long-term health of Ukraine’s people,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “WHO is doing everything we can to support Ukraine’s Ministry of Health and deliver essential medical supplies and equipment. But the one medicine that Ukraine needs most is the one that WHO can’t deliver – peace. We call on the Russian Federation to end the war.”

The war has increased the need for health care while reducing the system’s ability to provide services, particularly in areas of active conflict. As of 2 June, there have been 269 verified attacks on health, killing at least 76 people and injuring 59.

“In 100 days of war, there have been over 260 verified attacks on health care in Ukraine. These attacks are not justifiable, they are never okay, and they must be investigated. No health professional should have to deliver health care on a knife edge, but this is just what nurses, doctors, ambulance drivers, the medical teams in Ukraine are doing,” said Dr Hans Henri P. Kluge, WHO Regional Director for Europe.

“I have been privileged to meet many health workers during two visits to Ukraine since the war began. They are keeping vital services and hope alive in the face of unbelievable sorrow and suffering, and we salute them,” he added.

Some health facilities have been destroyed, while others have been overwhelmed by people seeking care for trauma and injuries resulting directly from the war. WHO has established hubs in areas close to the conflict, such as Dnipro, to rapidly reach the areas of greatest need.

“WHO is committed to being in Ukraine both now and in the longer term – addressing immediate health challenges and supporting reconstruction of the heath system. We are redeploying teams throughout the country as access and security improves,” said Dr Jarno Habicht, WHO Representative in Ukraine. “Health-mental and physical- must be at the centre of Ukraine’s recovery and reconstruction plans”.

To achieve this, WHO has launched an updated appeal for US$ 147.5 million, to support Ukraine’s worsening humanitarian need, provide immediate healthcare delivery and help the health system stay resilient for the longer term. Of this total, US$ 80 million is needed for in-country support, such as distributing medicines and delivering vital healthcare services and a further US$ 67.5 million is required to assist refugee-receiving and hosting countries, including Poland, the Czech Republic, Moldova and Romania.



The war has caused a massive increase in psychological harm and distress. Throughout the country, health care professionals report that the most common request now is help to deal with sleeplessness, anxiety, grief and psychological pain. WHO is working with the office of Olena Zelenska, First Lady of Ukraine, to develop a nationwide mental health programme accessible by all.

WHO has responded to the changed health needs in Ukraine by increasing numbers of staff and repurposing systems including our logistics system. This has enabled delivery of over 543 metric tonnes of medical supplies and equipment to the country which are being distributed mostly in the east, south and northern oblasts where need is currently greatest. Supplies provided include trauma surgery supplies, ambulances, Ukrainian-made ventilators able to continue function even when power fails, electric generators and oxygen equipment including building oxygen plants to help hospitals function autonomously.

Another major need is training to deal with the effects of war – trauma surgery, mass casualties, burns and chemical exposure. Since 24 February, WHO has trained more than 1300 healthcare workers on those topics.

Along with this, WHO has been working with the Ukraine Public Health Centre to strengthen disease surveillance and laboratory diagnostics, and with local authorities to build back vaccination programmes and essential health services. To complement the health system, WHO is working with over 40 Emergency Medical Teams as well.


A global research consultation convened by the WHO R&D Blueprint gathered over 500 experts and more than 2000 participants to discuss knowledge gaps and research priorities for monkeypox, in view of the recent outbreaks of the disease in both endemic and non-endemic countries.



Researchers and high-level experts from all over the world met virtually for two days to review the available evidence on the epidemiology of the virus; its transmission dynamics; the clinical characteristics; One Health research; community engagement; and countermeasures for managing the disease, including clinical care, treatments and vaccines. They agreed that effective countermeasures should be made available based on where the need was greatest.

Improved control of monkeypox in endemic countries is critical to address increases in disease incidence, and to control importations and outbreaks elsewhere. Participants agreed that strengthened collaboration among researchers in endemic countries, who have a wealth of experience and data on the disease – along with researchers from other countries – will ensure that scientific knowledge advances more quickly.



Experts underlined the need for expedited studies to better understand the disease epidemiology, its clinical consequences, and the role of various modes of transmission. In addition, the following research needs were highlighted: a comprehensive One Health approach to understand animal-to-human transmission and animal reservoirs; development and evaluation of better diagnostic tools that can be available around the world; improved approaches to communicate and engage communities in affected areas; studies to optimize supportive clinical care; documentation of the best control and treatment practices; and prompt and transparent communication of data and scientific evidence.

Experts also emphasized the need for clinical studies of vaccines and therapeutics to better document their efficacy and understand how to use them in this and future outbreaks.



Implementing without delay public health activities – such as communicating prevention information, enhanced disease surveillance, contact tracing, isolation of cases and optimized care of of people with the virus – should be used to limit spread and help the people affected, no matter where they are.

This consultation is part of a range of WHO activities in response to this multi-country outbreak.

About the R&D Blueprint



The R&D Blueprint is a global strategy and preparedness plan that allows the rapid activation of R&D activities during epidemics. Its aim is to fast-track the availability of effective tests, vaccines and medicines that can be used to save lives and avert large scale crisis.



For each of these diseases, R&D roadmaps and, where relevant, target product profiles (TPPs) and generic protocols are developed through broad and open consultations with leading experts and other stakeholders. In addition, efforts to strengthen national regulatory and ethics bodies to respond to public health emergencies are being implemented.


The World Health Organization (WHO) with the support of Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization and its COVID-19 Vaccines Working Group, continues to review the emerging evidence on the increasing seroprevalence rates against SARS-CoV-2 globally and the characteristics and potential benefits of hybrid immunity. This statement reflects the current understanding of hybrid immunity and highlights the gaps in evidence and potential implications for vaccination schedules and strategies.

Definitions



The following definitions and terminology are used in this note:

Infection-induced immunity is defined as the immune protection in an unvaccinated individual after one or more SARS-CoV-2 infections.

is defined as the immune protection in an unvaccinated individual after one or more SARS-CoV-2 infections. Vaccine-induced immunity is defined as the immune protection in an individual who has not been previously infected with SARS-CoV-2 but has completed a primary series (currently one or two doses of EUL COVID-19 vaccine depending on the product) of any COVID-19 vaccine, or has also received a booster vaccination.

is defined as the immune protection in an individual who has not been previously infected with SARS-CoV-2 but has completed a primary series (currently one or two doses of EUL COVID-19 vaccine depending on the product) of any COVID-19 vaccine, or has also received a booster vaccination. Hybrid immunity is defined as the immune protection in individuals who have had one or more doses of a COVID-19 vaccine and experienced at least one SARS-CoV-2 infection before or after the initiation of vaccination.

In each case, the immune protection can be measured against different specific endpoints – infection (including viral load), disease (regardless of severity), or severe outcomes (hospitalisation, severe disease, or death) - and the level of protection may vary according to endpoints. For each endpoint, the immune protection may differ by vaccine, time since vaccination or infection, by SARS-CoV-2 variants, and host-specific factors such as age and comorbidities.



Seroprevalence

Exposure to SARS-CoV-2 through infection or vaccination triggers the production of antibodies that can be readily measured in the blood (referred to as ‘seroconversion’). If the level of antibodies in the blood exceeds a pre-specified threshold, the individual is said to be ‘seropositive’. This threshold can vary with the assay used, the target antigen being measured, and over time since exposure. The percentage of seropositive individuals in a population at a given timepoint is referred to as the seroprevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in that population.



Inferring the level of population-level protection against infection and/or severe outcomes from seroprevalence estimates is challenging for several reasons. First, the amount of antibodies produced in an individual due to infection or vaccination, and the waning of these over time, is determined by multiple factors such as age, the variant which caused infection, the severity of the infection, and vaccine product(s), among others. Therefore, seroprevalence estimates depend on survey design (e.g. sampling frame) as well as on the epidemiological history of the population. Second, seroprevalence estimates are based only on measures of antibodies and do not incorporate measures of cell-mediated immunity, which is an important component of the overall immune protection.



Delineating the degree of infection-induced, vaccine-induced, and hybrid immunity through seroprevalence estimates is similarly complex. The mechanism of exposure to the virus (infection or vaccination) and the vaccine product(s) mediate the immunological response i.e., the kind of antibodies produced and type of cell-mediated immune response triggered. For instance, mRNA and adenovirus vector vaccines induce antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein; thus, a positive test for spike protein specific IgM or IgG in individuals who have received these vaccines could indicate either prior infection or prior vaccination. To differentiate between the two, a nucleocapsid protein-based assay needs to be used; a positive nucleocapsid-protein assay indicates prior infection. In contrast, inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccines elicit an immunological response to the spike and nucleocapsid protein; thus, in individuals who have received an inactivated vaccine, a positive result in a test for spike protein specific IgM or IgG or a test that specifically evaluates IgM or IgG to the nucleocapsid protein could indicate either prior infection or prior vaccination. Currently available SARS-CoV-2 antibody tests used in serosurveys assess levels of IgM and/or IgG to the spike or the nucleocapsid protein. The vast majority of countries have used a combination of mRNA, viral-vectored and inactivated vaccine products, which makes it difficult to distinguish between the degree of infection- versus vaccine-induced immunity in a population. Moreover, even in settings in which predominantly mRNA vaccines were used, a positive test for anti-nucleocapsid antibodies cannot identify episodes of reinfection, which is an important consideration in assessing levels of hybrid immunity.



Thus, it is difficult to directly infer the degree of population-level protection against infection, and to disentangle the levels of infection- or vaccine-induced and hybrid immunity from

seroprevalence studies. Notwithstanding, both infection- and vaccine-induced immunity confer high protection against severe disease, with hybrid immunity being superior, as outlined below.



Current situation: global seroprevalence trends



According to the most recent estimates by the WHO UNITY Studies Collaborator Group shared with SAGE, the percentage of seropositive individuals increased in all regions during 2021, globally rising from 16% in February to 67% by October 2021 1 . Seroprevalence varied across countries as well as sub-nationally including across sub-populations within countries during this period. Seroprevalence rates also varied by age, with lower rates reported for the youngest (0-9) and oldest age groups (60+) compared to adults aged 20-29 years in studies up to end of 20211. In most low- and middle-income countries, the rise in seroprevalence in this period has been driven by an increase in infections rather than vaccination, given the very low vaccination rates through the end of 2021.



The Omicron variant (BA.1 and then BA.2), which emerged in November 2021, is highly transmissible and has become dominant in all regions of the world, rapidly replacing the previously circulating variants. New sub-lineages of Omicron are emerging, such as BA.3, BA.4 and BA.5. Due to a steep rise in the number of infections in many countries following the emergence of Omicron and increasing vaccine coverage, both vaccine- and infection-induced population seroprevalence levels are expected to have increased substantially since October 2021, albeit with sustained regional and sub-population variations. The widespread exposure to Omicron and variable vaccination coverage across and within countries has resulted in a complex population-based immunity landscape.



Evidence for infection-induced, vaccine-induced, and hybrid immune protection



Protection against infection and mild symptomatic disease.

A previous SARS-CoV-2 infection provides high protection against reinfection with variants of concern (VOCs) such as Alpha and Delta2, which have limited immune escape characteristics. The duration of infection-induced protection depends on a range of host-specific factors including the severity of the immunizing infection3. Generally, protective immunity against infection and mild disease has been observed to persist for 10-12 months post-infection for pre-Omicron VOC4. A SARS-CoV-2 infection has also been found to induce durable cell-mediated immunity for at least 6-8 months5, although the evidence for this is from pre-Omicron VOCs. Data for duration of protection beyond these time frames are still being collected in prospective cohort studies.



Infection-induced immunity confers significantly less protection against Omicron than against non-Omicron VOC six or more months after a previous infection6–8. The durability and breadth of immunity after infection with Omicron in unvaccinated individuals has not yet been determined.



Vaccine-induced immunity following a primary vaccine series is modest against infection due to Omicron in the months after vaccination, and wanes significantly over time6. Vaccine-induced immunity against Omicron-related mild symptomatic disease, asymptomatic infection, and viral shedding is also modest and short-lived even following a booster dose9.



The majority of studies have found that the protection conferred by hybrid immunity against infection and mild symptomatic disease is similar, or modestly better than that by infection-induced or vaccine-induced immunity alone6–8. Compared with infection-induced immunity, hybrid immunity from two or three exposures to the antigen (infection with pre-Omicron VOC or Omicron and one or two doses) improve immune protection against symptomatic infection due to Omicron7,8. The immune protection after two doses (with a prior infection) waned 10-19 weeks after the second dose but was restored after a booster dose7,8. However, the duration of additional protection achieved through boosters was variable6–8,10.



Protection against disease, and severe outcomes including death.



Infection-induced immunity was found to provide strong protection against severe disease caused by pre-Omicron VOC up to 9-12 months post infection11, with some waning observed in this period. Infection-induced protective immunity against disease and severe outcomes wanes faster against VOCs, especially against Omicron4,7.



Currently available data from emergency-use listed COVID-19 vaccines show that vaccines provide higher levels of protection than SARS-CoV-2 infection against severe disease outcomes, with modest waning in the 6 months following completion of primary vaccine series12. Further, they continue to protect against severe disease, hospitalizations and death due to Omicron, albeit to a lesser degree compared with other VOC13. The level of initial protection achieved and the degree of waning of vaccine effectiveness may differ depending on the VOC circulating in the population. The extent of waning may further depend upon the vaccine product(s) in use, and the target population (e.g., older adults, immunocompromised persons). Vaccine-induced protection against symptomatic disease, including severe disease, is enhanced by booster doses13,14.



Hybrid immunity resulting from three or more exposures to the virus antigen (i.e., one or more exposures from vaccination and one or more from SARS-CoV-2 infections before or after vaccination) may provide superior protection (as measured by neutralization capacity) against VOCs, including Omicron, compared with two doses of vaccination, or previous SARS-CoV-2 infection without vaccination15. Waning of hybrid immunity, particularly due to Omicron infections is not yet characterized in magnitude or duration. More data are needed for a precise quantification of the immune protection from hybrid immunity compared with vaccine-induced immunity normalised for the same antigen exposure.



Policy implications of high seroprevalence levels and hybrid immunity



The need for, and optimal timing of, the primary vaccination series and booster doses may differ according to whether individuals have had a SARS-CoV-2 infection. At a population level, the number of doses and inter-dose interval, including for booster doses, may differ between settings with high and lower seroprevalence resulting from infection-induced immunity16. These considerations may be particularly important in identifying simplified vaccination schedule in lower-priority use groups identified in the WHO Roadmap prioritizing use of COVID-19 vaccines16.



Any policy regarding the vaccination of lower priority use groups should involve clear specification of the value of vaccination under consideration and multiple trade-offs, with seroprevalence in these groups representing one of the factors to be considered in the future. For instance, a modelling study in Kenya estimated that vaccination of young adults may not be cost-effective in a high seroprevalence setting17. At the same time, evidence from observational studies suggests that vaccination can reduce incidence of post COVID condition18. Prevention of mild disease, indirect impact on transmission, and reduction of incidence of post COVID condition can provide a strong rationale for vaccinating low priority use groups irrespective of previous exposure.

The WHO Roadmap for prioritizing use of COVID-19 vaccines sets a goal of achieving very high vaccination coverage rates in the highest and high priority-use groups. Every effort should be made to achieve high coverage with primary series and boosters in the most at-risk populations, irrespective of the infection-induced seroprevalence in that country . In light of existing evidence gaps, and heterogeneity of seroprevalence across population groups, the WHO Roadmap is currently not considering infection-induced immunity in its prioritization scenarios or dosing schedule.



Evidence gaps



While the overall evidence suggests that hybrid immunity offers superior protection against severe outcomes due to COVID-19 compared to infection-induced or vaccine-induced immunity alone, it is unclear whether this protection will persist with new variants. For instance, evolving evidence suggests that an Omicron BA.1 infection offers only limited protection against symptomatic disease caused by the emerging sub-lineages of Omicron (BA.4 and BA.5)19.

Moreover, there are crucial gaps in our current understanding of this complex issue. The duration of protection provided by hybrid immunity has not yet been determined, particularly that induced by Omicron infections. Both the quality and durability of hybrid immunity are likely to vary across age-groups and in individuals with underlying medical conditions including immune-compromising conditions. Further, these differences arise from a complex interplay of the SARS-CoV-2 variants with which individuals were infected, the vaccine product(s) in use, the interval between doses, and the time between vaccination and infection. These variations should be studied to further our understanding on how and when to use booster doses of vaccine to optimize vaccination strategies, including dosing schedule.



As of now, these is little to no data on the protective immunity in unvaccinated individuals who have experienced more than one SARS-CoV-2 infection. The durability and breadth of immune protection due to reduced doses (e.g. a single dose) of vaccines in conjunction with infection-induced immunity also remains under-studied. Assessment of the level of protection afforded by hybrid immunity thus generated is critical to inform optimal vaccination schedule, especially for in low-priority use groups, in light of increasing seroprevalence in these groups.



Conclusion



COVID-19 remains a severe threat to global health security and public health. The emergence of VOCs poses formidable challenges for global recovery from pandemic through immune evasion, increased transmissibility, or enhanced severity. The evolution of the pandemic remains unpredictable. Vaccination against COVID-19 reduces the risk of severe morbidity, and curtails the burden on health systems by protecting against hospitalization and death. Moreover, hybrid immunity confers improved protection compared to infection-induced immunity alone. Therefore, in line with the WHO SAGE Roadmap for prioritizing use of COVID-19 vaccines, achieving high primary vaccine series coverage in individuals in the highest and high-risk groups remains the foremost priority, irrespective of their infection history. Countries and implementing partners should emphasize the urgent need to fulfil this primary objective by calling for vaccination of all healthcare workers, immunocompromised individuals, and older persons. Booster doses are associated with enhanced protection against Omicron; highest and high-priority use groups should similarly be prioritised for these.



With more evidence, integrating infection and vaccination-induced immunity into vaccination strategies and/or schedules may provide gains through simplified and/or more effective immunization schedules in countries or communities that have already experienced high levels of community transmission. However, basing national vaccination policies on seroprevalence rates poses several challenges. Seroprevalence rates observed in population-based studies may not be representative of the entire population or certain subpopulations and age groups, and may also differ by factors such as urban versus rural settings. Moreover, hybrid immunity, although superior to infection- or vaccine induced immunity alone, depends on a number of factors in complex and interrelated ways.

Meanwhile, WHO reiterates the need for accruing consistent population representative data over time to further improve our understanding of waning of seroprevalence and hybrid immunity. In particular, seroprevalence studies are needed in specific at-risk populations such as older age groups which may inform vaccine priorities and targeted efforts in the future.



An improved understanding of hybrid immunity will contribute to evidence-based decisions on the need for additional COVID-19 vaccine doses to populations. When more evidence is available, advice on if and how hybrid immunity should be considered in national vaccination policies will be updated.

References:


WHO has today revealed new information on the extent to which tobacco damages both the environment and human health, calling for steps to make the industry more accountable for the destruction it is causing.

Every year the tobacco industry costs the world more than 8 million human lives, 600 million trees, 200 000 hectares of land, 22 billion tonnes of water and 84 million tonnes of CO2.

The majority of tobacco is grown in low-and-middle-income countries, where water and farmland are often desperately needed to produce food for the region. Instead, they are being used to grow deadly tobacco plants, while more and more land is being cleared of forests.

The WHO report “Tobacco: Poisoning our planet” highlights that the industry’s carbon footprint from production, processing and transporting tobacco is equivalent to one-fifth of the CO2 produced by the commercial airline industry each year, further contributing to global warming.

“Tobacco products are the most littered item on the planet, containing over 7000 toxic chemicals, which leech into our environment when discarded. Roughly 4.5 trillion cigarette filters pollute our oceans, rivers, city sidewalks, parks, soil and beaches every year,” said Dr Ruediger Krech, Director of Health Promotion at WHO.

Products like cigarettes, smokeless tobacco and e-cigarettes also add to the build-up of plastic pollution. Cigarette filters contain microplastics and make up the second-highest form of plastic pollution worldwide.

Despite tobacco industry marketing, there is no evidence that filters have any proven health benefits. WHO calls on policy-makers to treat cigarette filters, as what they are, single use plastics, and consider banning cigarette filters to protect public health and the environment.

The costs of cleaning up littered tobacco products fall on taxpayers, rather than the industry creating the problem. Each year, this costs China roughly US$ 2.6 billion and India roughly US$ 766 million. The cost for Brazil and Germany comes in at over US$ 200 million (see table below for further estimates).

Countries like France and Spain and cities like San Francisco, California in the USA have taken a stand. Following the Polluter Pays Principle, they have successfully implemented “extended producer responsibility legislation” which makes the tobacco industry responsible for clearing up the pollution it creates.

WHO urges countries and cities to follow this example, as well as give support to tobacco farmers to switch to sustainablecrops, implement strong tobacco taxes (that could also include an environmental tax) and offer support services to help people quit tobacco.

Note to the editor: In the table below, we present estimates of tobacco product waste (TPW) attributable costs in one country from each of the WHO regions. These estimates are based on the “proportional estimation” approach, which starts with an estimate of the costs of total litter (“all product waste,” or APW) for each country, and then applies an estimate of the proportion of all litter that is TPW (i.e., a TPW “weight”).

For estimated APW costs (column [1]), we relied on publicly available literature and reports for as many of the six countries as possible. For Brazil, China, and India, we were not able to identify any sources. Thus, for those countries, we imputed APW costs by applying the average APW cost per capita of similar middle-income countries for which data were available. Once we had an APW cost for all countries, we applied the TPW proportion. The TPW proportion was based on the global average from the Ocean Conservancy’s International Coastal Cleanup, weighted by the WHO smoking prevalence in each country (i.e., we assumed that countries with higher rates of smoking would have higher proportions of TPW). The final TPW cost estimate is the APW cost multiplied by the weighted TPW proportion.
Standardization of medical devices nomenclature

On the final day of the 75th World Health Assembly, Member States requested the Secretariat to continue the integration of information related to terms, codes and definitions of existing systems for naming medical devices, and make them available to Member States, through its Medical Devices Information System (MEDEVIS). They asked the Secretariat to link MEDEVIS to other WHO electronic platforms, such as the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-11).



The process will advance the management of medical devices with the goal of enhancing access to medical devices; contributing to emergency preparedness and response; and improving patient safety and the quality of health care.



There are currently thousands of types of different medical devices in use, ranging from stethoscopes to complex imaging technologies. The absence of a common standard name for each type of medical device has caused confusion between the various types of devices; affected supply and traceability, and impeded health care delivery.



The survey that informed the latest edition of the WHO global atlas of medical devices indicates that 75 countries do not have an official nomenclature system.



The Secretariat is to report on progress at the 152nd Executive Board.

Links

Priority medical devices information system





Improving infection, prevention and control

The World Health Assembly also approved a ‘Global Strategy on Infection Prevention and Control’ through a resolution that aims to position IPC as central to infectious hazard and health emergency preparedness and response, and as key to addressing the silent burden of healthcare associated infections (HAIs) and antimicrobial resistance (AMR). It positions IPC in the context of health system strengthening and high-quality care delivery, with the aim of improving patient and health worker safety.



The resolution, which comes at a time when COVID-19 has vividly demonstrated the critical role of good IPC in keeping people safe, provides 13 recommendations to Member States. These range from including IPC as a key component in global health emergency preparedness, prevention and response, to ensuring sustainable IPC programmes and WASH infrastructures and resources at the national, sub-national and health-care facility level in all countries.



Earlier this week, WHO issued the first ever global report on infection, prevention and control, noting that in low and middle-income countries, 15 of every 100 people visiting a healthcare facility will leave it with a new infection, and estimating that half the world’s health facilities lack basic water supplies. The report provides a global situation analysis of how IPC programmes are being implemented in countries around the world. It also highlights harm to patients and health workers caused by HIAs and AMR; addresses the impact and cost-effectiveness of IPC programmes; and suggests strategies, resources and key priorities to countries for IPC improvement.



Links:

Draft resolution: Global strategy on infection prevention and control

Infection prevention and control

Global Strategies for HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections

In the final discussion of the World Health Assembly, Member States noted with appreciation new Global Health Sector Strategies for HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections for the period 2022-2030.



The global health sector strategies aim to reignite momentum in the responses to these diseases that had been eroded by disruptions to services during the COVID-19 pandemic. They set out to simultaneously strengthen responses to specific diseases while increasingly integrating them into broader health frameworks and taking opportunities, where feasible, to increase impact by addressing aspects of the diseases jointly.



The strategies call for a more precise focus to reach the people who are most affected and most at risk for each disease, and to address inequities. They promote synergies under a universal health coverage and primary health care framework. They also outline actions to identify and manage future outbreaks of HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections, as well as other emerging health threats, as these arise.



HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections present ongoing and persistent public health challenges and combined, are responsible for 2.3 million deaths and are associated with 1.2 million cases of cancer each year.

Links

Global HIV, Hepatitis and STIs Programmes




Record number of decisions for noncommunicable diseases and mental health

Delegates at the World Health Assembly approved a record number of recommendations relating to noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) such as cancers, diabetes, heart and lung diseases, as well as to mental health, and their risk factors.



The move comes ahead of the fourth United Nations General Assembly high-level meeting on the prevention and control of NCDs to be held in 2025, in a drive to accelerate progress towards globally agreed NCD and SDG targets.



In addition to an agreed preparatory process in the lead-up to this meeting, measures to reduce deaths from NCDs include a new implementation roadmap. The roadmap aims to help Member States speed up action to support their populations and achieve the NCD-related targets in the Sustainable Development Goals.



Also agreed was a new action plan for the Global Coordination Mechanism on the Prevention and Control of NCDs, a platform which brings together key stakeholders working to improve the NCD landscape, by strengthening multi-sector and multi-stakeholder action and collaboration to address NCDs and mental health.



Related links



On the road to 2025: the global NCD deadline

Follow-up to the political declaration of the third high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases

Global Coordination Mechanism on the Prevention and Treatment of NCDs



Draft workplan for the Global Coordination Mechanism on the prevention and control of NCDs 2022-2025

Support to people living with NCDs in humanitarian emergencies

Delegates agreed recommendations on how to strengthen the design and implementation of policies (including those for resilient health systems and health services and infrastructure) to prevent and manage NCDs in humanitarian emergencies. Recent emergencies such as the conflict in Ukraine and the COVID-19 pandemic have highlighted how people living with NCDs are at particularly high risk, requiring special attention in emergency planning and response.

They provided a set of recommended actions for Member States, international, humanitarian partners, civil society, the private sector and for WHO to better address NCD emergency preparedness and response during the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond. Actions for the WHO Secretariat include reviewing current NCD responses and strengthening WHO’s capacity to develop and disseminate normative products such as technical guidance on NCDs, to support countries in developing and implementing preparedness and national response plans for health emergencies. It will also be important to support procurement and deployment of NCD medicines and supplies such as insulin.

Related links

Recommendations on how to strengthen the design and implementation of policies, including those for resilient health systems and health services and infrastructure, to treat people living with noncommunicable diseases and to prevention and control their risk factors in humanitarian emergencies

Strengthening rehabilitation in emergencies

First-ever global coverage targets for diabetes

For the first time, delegates at the World Health Assembly have supported the creation of global targets for addressing diabetes. The targets are part of a new comprehensive set of recommendations to strengthen and monitor national diabetes responses.

They include ensuring that by 2030, 80% of people living with diabetes have been diagnosed; 80% have good control of glycaemia; 80% of people with diagnosed diabetes have good control of their blood pressure; 60% of people with diabetes who are 40 years or older receive statins; and 100% all people with type 1 diabetes have access to affordable insulin and blood glucose self-monitoring. Diabetes is currently one of the top ten causes of death worldwide.

Related links



Reducing the burden of noncommunicable diseases through strengthening prevention and control of diabetes

The Global Diabetes Compact





A landmark global strategy on oral health

While largely preventable, there were estimated to be more than 3.5 billion cases of oral diseases and other oral conditions globally in 2019. Despite affecting almost half the world’s population, to date there has been no global strategy on oral health.

Delegates agreed that such a global strategy is now necessary. It will inform the development of a new global action plan, including a framework for tracking progress with targets to be achieved by 2030, to be discussed during the World Health Assembly 2023. WHO will also publish its first ever global report on oral health later in 2022.

The global strategy on oral health sets a bold vision of universal coverage for oral health services by 2030. Key approaches include the setting of ambitious national responses, integrating oral health into primary health care and optimizing digital technologies.

Related links

Draft global strategic on oral health

Oral health





New recommendations to prevent and manage obesity

World Health Assembly delegates have agreed new recommendations for the prevention and management of obesity over the life course and a set of related targets in a bid to halt the rise of obesity in children under 5, adolescents and adults by 2025 and to end all forms of malnutrition by 2030.

They outlined actions to be taken by governments, society as a whole, and the WHO Secretariat, in order to reduce the intake of free sugars to less than 10% of total energy intake in adults and children; to increase exclusive breastfeeding rates in the first 6 months up to at least 70%, and to reduce the global prevalence of physical inactivity by 15%. WHO has already developed a new plan to support Member States in accelerating action to stop obesity.

Related links

Acceleration Plan to support Member States in implementing the recommendations for the prevention and management of obesity over the life course





Improving the lives of people with neurological disorders

Delegates agreed a new intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders (including stroke, migraine, dementia and meningitis) that aims to improve access to care and treatment for people living with these conditions, while preventing new cases and promoting brain health and development across the life course.

Neurological disorders are the leading cause of disability-adjusted life years and the second leading cause of death globally. Despite the high global burden of neurological conditions, access to both services and support for these conditions is insufficient, especially in low- and middle-income countries.

The action plan will address the challenges and gaps in providing care and services for people with neurological disorders that exist worldwide and ensure a comprehensive, coordinated response across sectors.

Related links

Draft intersectoral global action plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022-2031

Accelerating action to reduce alcohol-related harm

Delegates also agreed an action plan (2022-2030) to effectively implement the Global strategy to reduce the harmful use of alcohol as a public health priority.

The pace of development and implementation of alcohol policies has been uneven in WHO regions and countries. Since its endorsement 10 years ago, the resources and capacities for implementation of the WHO Global strategy to reduce the harmful use of alcohol have been inadequate to address the magnitude of the problem. As a result every 10 seconds a person dies from alcohol related harm.

The alcohol action plan proposes operational objectives and principles, key action areas for Member States, WHO Secretariat, international partners, CSOs and academia, as well as proposed measures for economic operators in alcohol production and trade. It contains a set of global targets, indicators and milestones for monitoring progress.

Related links

Draft action plan (2022-2030) to effectively implement the Global strategy to reduce the harmful use of alcohol as a public health priority

Supporting health and care workers

Delegates agreed to adopt the Working for Health Action Plan (2022-2030). The Action Plan, which was developed through a Member State-led process, sets out policy priorities to rapidly progress workforce capacity across three dimensions: planning and finance, education and employment, and protection and performance.

The protection of the workforce, a rising concern in all settings, is supported by the consensus for a Global health and care worker compact which sets out how to protect and safeguard the rights of health and care workers, in addition to promoting and ensuring decent working conditions.

The resolution recognizes the global progress to address health workforce shortages since 2016. WHO reports that the global shortfall has reduced to 15 million in 2020 and is projected to drop to 10 million by 2030. However, gains have not accrued equally across regions, limiting access to health services for hundreds of millions of people worldwide. WHO continues to urge all Member States to apply the precautionary principle before international recruitment of health workers from countries with severe workforce shortages.

Related links

A75/12 Human resources for health: Working for Health: draft –2030 action plan.

A75/13 Human resources for health: Global health and care worker compact

A75/14 Human resources for health: WHO Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel: fourth round of national reporting

A75/15 Human resources for health: Global strategy on human resources for health: workforce 2030

Working for Health 2022-2030 Action Plan

Global health and care worker compact

Health workforce





Updated strategy for food safety

Delegates at the Health Assembly agreed to adopt the updated WHO Global Strategy for Food Safety 2022-2030, in order to strengthen national food safety systems. The update is to ensure food safety systems are modernized and multi-sectoral collaboration strengthened with a view to ensuring that all people consume safe and healthy food, thereby reducing the burden of foodborne diseases, which currently affect almost 1 in 10 people worldwide.

Member States are encouraged to either develop country implementation roadmaps or to reflect actions to implementation within existing food safety policies and programmes, and to allocate the necessary resources. The Director-General is also requested to report on progress biannually until 2030.

The strategy was put forward in consultation with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, with Member States and with the World Organization for Animal Health.

Related links

Draft WHO Global Strategy for Food Safety 2022-2030

Food safety fact sheet

Global Health for Peace Initiative

Delegates today requested that the Director-General consult with Member States and Observers on proposed ways forward for the implementation of WHO’s report on a new Global Health for Peace Initiative. The Initiative would aim to build on and develop new partnerships that drive forward the triple billion goals in conflict and/or fragile areas.

Suggested approaches include:

WHO programmes achieving both health and peace dividends at the country level by mainstreaming the Health for Peace approach;

Member States engaging in the Health for Peace Initiative through support or implementation; and

WHO driving the Health for Peace agenda at both the operational and normative levels.

The World Health Assembly also requested a roadmap, to be developed in full consultation with Member States, Observers, other United Nations agencies and relevant non-State actors in official relations with WHO. This roadmap will be put forward for consideration next year by the Seventy-sixth World Health Assembly through the 152nd session of the Executive Board.

Related links

WHO Global Health for Peace Initiative

More rapid changes to the International Health Regulations

Delegates agreed to amend the International Health Regulations (IHR) to reduce the time of entry into force of any future amendments from 24 to 12 months. A comprehensive process for addressing future amendments to the IHR was agreed earlier in the week.

Related links

Report of the Working Group on strengthening WHO preparedness and response to health emergencies to the Seventy-fifth World Health Assembly

Proposal for amendments to the International Health Regulations (2005)


During a moving ceremony at the Seventy-fifth World Health Assembly in Geneva, awards were presented to a group of individuals from around the world for their outstanding contributions to public health.

Opening the award ceremony, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of the World Health Organization, said: ”The 2022 public health prizes and awards celebrate people and institutions for successfully addressing a huge array of health challenges around the world. It is an honour for us to come together to acknowledge these true champions of health. I thank the foundations and institutions who so generally support these awards.”

Many of the prizes awarded have been established by, or set up in memory of, an eminent public health professional.

The call for nominations of candidates for each prize is sent out each year after closure of the World Health Assembly. Nominations can be made by national health administrations of a WHO Member State and by any former recipient of the prizes. The 2022 winners were selected at the 150th session of the Executive Board, in January 2022, on the basis of recommendations made by the dedicated selection panels for each prize.

Winners of the 2022 prizes

Ihsan Doğramacı, Family Health Foundation Prize

Award winner: Professor Mehmet Haberal, Turkey

A pioneer in the fields of general surgery, transplantation, and burn treatment Professor Haberal has helped establish a legal framework for organ transplantation in Turkey, while enhancing its social acceptability through a holistic approach to family and community health, working with families of patients with terminal conditions and with religious leaders. His leadership and collaboration with national, regional and global institutions have led to the creation of numerous organ transplantation centres in Turkey and the training of many health professionals interested in this field of work.

Sasakawa Health Prize

Award winner: Dr Paisan Ruamviboonsuk, Thailand

An ophthalmologist specializing in retinal eye care, Dr Ruamviboonsuk has, over the past 25 years, focused on addressing the second leading cause of blindness in Thailand – diabetic retinopathy. He invented and started using a special screening method, then piloted an initiative to train non-ophthalmological personnel to use it and be able to correctly detect retinopathies everywhere in Thailand, even in the most remote areas. As a result of his work, diabetic retinopathy screening is now a nationwide programme run by the Ministry of Public Health, free of charge for all.

United Arab Emirates Health Foundation Prize

Award winner: Nicaragua’s Network for Fighting Malaria

The National Malaria Component of the Ministry for Citizen’s Power for Health of Nicaragua, together with the community network of voluntary collaborators (ColVol), has been key in implementing the national programme of malaria control for over 50 years. A community of local health workers who focus on the surveillance, diagnosis and treatment of malaria in the municipality of Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, ColVol are leaders in community engagement, reaching remote and ethnically diverse communities. The burden of disease of malaria has significantly decreased in the communities served.

His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah Prize for Research in Health Care for the Elderly and in Health Promotion

Awardee: Dr Hanadi Khamis Mubarak Al Hamad, Qatar

Qatar’s national lead for healthy ageing at the Ministry of Public Health and senior clinical leader for geriatric, long-term care and rehabilitation services, Dr Hanadi Al Hamad has spearheaded the development of innovative programmes such as geriatric virtual clinics for older people and an urgent day-care unit in Qatar. As a result of her outstanding work, there has been a 20% increase in bed capacity for long-term care; mobile- and home-care services are now fully integrated; a dedicated web page for older people now provides information about healthy ageing; and community rehabilitation and memory clinic services have expanded at the primary care level.

Dr LEE Jong-wook Memorial Prize for Public Health

Award winners: Professor Prakit Vathesatogkit, Thailand and the Severe Hypothermia Treatment Centre, Poland

Professor Prakit Vathesatogkit, Thailand

Executive Secretary of the Action on Smoking and Health (ASH) Foundation since 1986 and member of the National Committee for the Control of Tobacco Use at the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand, Professor Vathesatogkit has devoted his professional life to tobacco control, resulting not only in improved treatment and care protocols for patients, but also in an impressive array of tobacco control measures, including tobacco taxes and restrictions on tobacco advertising and sports sponsorship. Professor Vathesatogkit is a pioneer in advocating for these measures and works across sectors, engaging the general public and developing and empowering networks.

Severe Hypothermia Treatment Centre, Poland

Poland’s Severe Hypothermia Treatment Centre was the first Polish facility dedicated to treating hypothermic patients and one of the world's first medical centres dedicated to the treatment of accidental hypothermia. Dr Tomasz Darocha, an expert in the field of extracorporeal therapy, and Dr Sylweriusz Kosiński, a specialist in anesthesiology and intensive care, created the Centre. The Severe Hypothermia Treatment Centre has initiated numerous research and development projects to design modern technological solutions used in the diagnosis and treatment of hypothermia. They have done ground-breaking work to train first responders in mountain rescue teams, to save lives.

The large group of doctors and experts working at the Centre combines medical and research work with social work, recognizing the problem of “urban hypothermia” and the social dimension of accidental hypothermia. This includes attention to the need for awareness among those at risk of hypothermia, for example people in situations of homelessness or poverty.

Nelson Mandela Award for Health Promotion

Award winner: Dr Wu Zunyou, China

Chief Epidemiologist at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Dr Zunyou Wu is recognized for his achievements in the field of HIV/AIDS prevention, such as the innovative, evidence-based policies he has built to reach groups most vulnerable to HIV/AIDS. He was a pioneer in designing, piloting and scaling-up outreach programmes among sex workers and established China’s first needle-exchange programme and first large-scale opioid replacement treatment. The impact of these measures has been significant: today, drug users represent 1% of all HIV infections in China, while in 2004, they represented half.

As a result of Dr Wu’s work, HIV testing is now a key prevention tool among all vulnerable groups, with about 300 million tests carried out in China in 2020. Dr Wu’s recommendations on outreach interventions for vulnerable groups have become national policy.
Resolution on "Health emergency in Ukraine"

In a vote (with 88 yes, 12 no, 53 abstentions), delegates at the World Health Assembly agreed a resolution on the “Health emergency in Ukraine and refugee receiving and hosting countries, stemming from the Russian Federation’s aggression."

Among other issues, the resolution brings attention to the direct and indirect health impacts in Ukraine, in the region and beyond; condemns attacks on health care, as documented by WHO’s Surveillance System for Attacks on Health Care; and urges the Russian Federation to immediately cease any attacks on hospitals and other healthcare facilities.

Resolution

Surveillance System for Attacks on Health Care



Extension of the Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee for the WHO Health Emergencies Programme

The Director-General renewed the mandate of the Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee (IOAC) for the World Health Organization for two years. The Committee was created in 2016 to provide oversight and monitoring of the development and performance of the WHO Emergencies Programme, and to guide the Programme’s activities. It reports annually to the Health Assembly.

Delegates encouraged the Secretariat to adopt the recommendations in this year’s report.

The Director-General thanked the co-chairs and members for their work over the past years, and welcomed Professor Walid Ammar, Director of the Doctorate and Research in Public Health Program at St. Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon, as the new Chair.

The IOAC report
Chair,

honourable PBAC members,

colleagues,



it is a great pleasure and honour to report on the outcome of the Working Group on Sustainable Financing.



As you know, the working group was established by the EB in January last year, in order to enable the WHO to have the robust structure needed to fulfil the Member States expectations.



Already at the start of this long journey, there were a general notion, that there is a huge discrepancy in between what the world expects from WHO and its de facto financial capacities.

We have highlighted, that WHO’s budget is to 86 % dependent on generous donors and that only roughly 14 % of WHO’s finances are truly predictable. This situation has put WHO at severe risk, including its independence, its integrity, its agility and certainly also its mandated role to be the world’s leading and coordinating authority in global health.



The challenge of sustainable financing has often been described as potentially the greatest historic challenge that WHO has been facing as an organization, recognizing that many efforts to tackle this issue have been tried but did not solve the issue over the past two decades.



While the chair of the working group has sometimes used the maybe inappropriate words to describe the situation, namely that “WHO’s financing is fundamentally rotten”, there was a clear consensus in the working group, that the status quo of WHO’s financing is unacceptable.



This being said, it is with great pleasure, that I am able to report to you, that we reached a consensus on all of our recommendations. And if implemented, they will certainly change the unacceptable status quo to the better.



So what have we reached a consensus on?



I am not going to read out all recommendations, as you have them before you but I will highlight some key ones:



The WG stresses that Member States as a collective must match their willingness to fund the Organization with the demands that they place on it.



We further stress that any increase in Member States’ assessed contributions needs to be accompanied by appropriate governance reforms, to be agreed by Member States, together with the further strengthening of transparency, efficiency, accountability and compliance within the Organization.



We discussed the severe fiscal constraints and explicitly acknowledge that many Member States face severe financial challenges, including those accentuated by the COVID-19 pandemic.



Regarding the PBAC: We strongly recommend a strengthening of the role of the Programme, Budget and Administration Committee, to make it more effective, robust and transparent, and more engaged with the Secretariat during the budgeting process and potentially through additional deliberations.



A key issue, that was often referred to as the most tricky issue in the debate, namely a potential AC increase:

We recommend that the Seventy-fifth World Health Assembly, recognizing the important role of assessed contributions in sustainably financing the Organization, should request the Secretariat to develop budget proposals, through the regular budget cycle, for an increase of assessed contributions to contribute to financial sustainability of WHO and with its aspiration to reach a level of 50% of the 2022–2023 base budget by the biennium 2030–2031, while aiming to achieve this by the biennium 2028–2029.

But the WGSF does not leave this aspiration in abstract terms but proposes very concrete steps to reach this aspiration, namely:



The Secretariat should develop a budget proposal with a targeted first increase of 20% of the assessed contributions assessment for the biennium 2022–2023, as part of the Proposed programme budget 2024–2025, and to be submitted for approval to the Seventy-sixth World Health Assembly.



As recommended already by the IPPPR, in addition to a substantive AC increase, we recommend that the Health Assembly request the Secretariat to explore the feasibility of a replenishment mechanism to broaden further the financing base, in consultation with Member States and taking into consideration the Framework of Engagement with Non-State Actors.



As mentioned already, any substantive AC increase would need to be supported by concrete steps to ensure the agility of WHO.



Therefore, the Working Group on Sustainable Financing also recommends the establishment of an agile Member States task group on strengthening WHO budgetary, programmatic and financing governance to analyse challenges in governance for transparency, efficiency, accountability and compliance, and come up with recommendations.



The establishment of the Task Group, open to all Member States, should be taken up during the 151st session of the Executive Board.



So you may wonder, what should the Assembly do with these recommendations?



We drafted a decision for adoption by the Assembly:

(1) to adopt the recommendations of the Working Group on Sustainable Financing, and

(2) to request the Director-General to put in place measures to ensure the implementation of these recommendations.



So, what does this outcome of the working group mean, outing it into the broader perspective.



To many the financing of the WHO may seem very technical or complex.



However, what the Working Group has discussed and has found a consensus on is not just a technical issue. This goes far beyond financing some WHO programs.



It was clear for the working group that what we were discussing is nothing less than the future role of WHO in global health and even beyond, namely the question, what kind of global health architecture we envisage: A less fragmented, better coordinated, more efficient and truly inclusive global health governance with a fundamentally strengthened WHO at its centre as the enabled leading and coordinating authority.



The recommendations, if so adopted by the Assembly, will enable WHO to live up to member state’s expectations.



They are a game changer for WHO, for every programme, every country office, every major office and most likely also for the work every single WHO staff member.

Beyond WHO, they are a game changer for global health governance. If implemented, the recommendations will allow WHO to live up to the expectation to be the key convener for global health.



Many of the issues, that the PBAC has discussed over the past decades, namely the unsatisfactory heat map, the unsatisfactory drying out of the enabling functions, putting the entire organization at risk, the main challenges in HR contracts with a growing dependency on non-staff contracts and many other issues, will be positively impacted by these recommendations.



Yes, the recommended steps will be a ground-breaking improvement for WHO.



And, yes, to finalize these recommendations, it took roughly 1 ½ years. But this huge effort by all colleagues involved will prove to be worth it, if we finally adequately address this historic challenge.



The compromise was possible due to the strong commitment by all members of the working group and their will, to strengthen the WHO.



It was possible, because everyone in the room understood, that the window of opportunity to learn one key lesson from this pandemic, might be already closing.



Some commentators have referred to the compromise as “global health diplomacy at its best”.



To me, this was a strong success of what I would call “constructive multilateralism”. This was a truly inclusive process. All MS had the chance to actively shape the outcome and did so. The working group was attended by an outstanding number of delegations throughout its 7 sessions with many delegations having to wake up in the middle of the night, in order to follow the deliberations.

This engagement shows the given true commitment for a stronger WHO.



This was a learning exercise for many of us, in particular the chair.



I would like to sincerely thank all colleagues and members from the working group for allowing this great outcome and for their readiness to compromise.



I would like to thank my co-chairs for their wisdom, leadership and patience with their chair throughout the past 1 ½ years.



I would like to thank the entire Secretariat for its support to this process, despite having to handle an ongoing pandemic, obviously the different teams here in HQ but also the regions and colleagues in the country offices.



A big thank also to the various external colleagues, the high level panels, the independent experts but also civil society and academia who followed the process and pushed us all for an ambitious outcome.

As you see, at least from the perspective of the chair, this was real team work.

Thank you for the time to address you and I hope, you will indeed make the recommendations a lasting success of multilateralism.



It is now or never.
Preparing cities and urban centres for emergencies



Concurring on the need for cities and urban settings to be better prepared to respond to health emergencies, delegates at the Seventy-Fifth World Health Assembly agreed a resolution calling for more action and resources in these unique settings.



Cities and local authorities have an important role in preventing, preparing for and responding to health emergencies, in part because cities can be uniquely vulnerable, due to population density, the movement of people in and out, and the vulnerability of some communities themselves.



The resolution called for better funding, planning, cooperation across regions and between cities, and a better overall understanding and focus on unique issues faced by people living in these areas.

Resolution

Urban health



Improving the quality, efficiency and capacity of clinical trials



Delegates also passed a resolution for improving clinical trial capabilities in all countries, as a central aspect of strengthening countries’ health systems.



Clinical trials have been recognized as indispensable for generating high-quality evidence on the safety and efficacy of medicines, vaccines and other health interventions, which is critical for informing health policy and clinical practice.



The resolution calls for greater efficiency, funding, timely data and results sharing, improved public-private collaboration and better coordination as well as for stronger regulatory and ethical frameworks in countries.



During public health emergencies of international concern, the delegates called for greater speed and transparency in conducting and sharing the results of clinical trials, while safeguarding the well-being of trial participants.

Resolution



Clinical trials
Today, at the Seventy-fifth World Health Assembly, Member States agreed to adopt a landmark decision to improve the World Health Organization’s financing model.



The decision adopted, in full, the recommendations of a Sustainable Financing Working Group made up of WHO’s Member States, which was set up in January 2021 and chaired by Björn Kümmel, from Germany.



In one of the key recommendations in the Working Group’s report to the Health Assembly, Member States target a gradual increase of their assessed contributions (membership dues) to represent 50% of WHO’s core budget by the 2030–2031 budget cycle, at the latest. In the last budget biennium, 2020–2021, assessed contributions represented only 16% of the approved programme budget.



The report includes other recommendations, such as exploring the feasibility of a replenishment mechanism to broaden the financing base. It also asks the WHO Secretariat to work with a Member States task group to strengthen WHO's governance, which will make recommendations on transparency, efficiency, accountability and compliance. The task group’s work will help ensure that increases to Member States’ assessed contributions will be accompanied by further reforms to the way the Organization operates.



WHO's current financing model has been identified by many experts as posing a risk to the integrity and independence of its work. WHO’s over-reliance on voluntary contributions, with a large proportion earmarked for specific areas of work, results in an ongoing misalignment between organizational priorities and the ability to finance them. The recommendations today are designed to substantially address these shortcomings.



It is intended that the gradual increase to assessed contributions will start with WHO’s 2024–25 budget, with a proposed 20% increase over the assessed contributions in the approved 2022–23 base budget. The aim is to reach 50% of WHO’s budget by 2028–2029 if possible, and by 2030–31 at the latest, up from the current 16% in 2020–21. This would mean that by 2028–2029, WHO would see an increase of roughly US$ 600 million a year in the part of its income that comes from the most sustainable and predictable sources.



More predictable and sustainable funding for WHO makes economic sense for the Organization’s contributors, with its new investment case ‘A Healthy Return’ showing that every US dollar invested in WHO delivers a return on investment of at least 35 US dollars. Sustainable financing will better equip WHO to deliver more effectively for all its Member States and their populations, for example through longer-term programming in countries and attracting and retaining expertise.

WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said, “This decision addresses head-on the decades-long challenge WHO has faced on predictable, flexible and sustainable funding. Delivering on the target they have agreed today will mean our Member States are empowering WHO to meet their expectations and truly fulfill our mandate as the world’s leading global health authority.” “Coming on the day I am re-elected, this decision gives all of us at WHO renewed confidence as we face the future,” he added.



Björn Kümmel, deputy head of the global health division at Germany’s Federal Ministry of Health and chair of WHO’s Working Group on Sustainable Funding, said, “This decision is about nothing less than the future role of WHO in global health. Even beyond that, it is about what we envisage for the global health architecture: a less fragmented, better coordinated, more efficient and truly inclusive global health governance with a fundamentally strengthened WHO at its centre as the enabled leading and coordinating authority.”
WHO Member States today re-elected Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus to serve a second five-year term as Director-General of the world’s leading public health agency. Dr Tedros was first elected in 2017.

His re-election was confirmed during the 75th World Health Assembly in Geneva. He was the sole candidate.

“I am humbled by the opportunity provided by Member States to serve a second term as WHO Director-General,” said Dr Tedros. “This honour, though, comes with great responsibility and I am committed to working with all countries, my colleagues around the world, and our valued partners, to ensure WHO delivers on its mission to promote health, keep the world safe and serve the vulnerable.”

Today’s vote was the culmination of an election process that began in April 2021 when Member States were invited to submit proposals for candidates for the post of Director-General. The WHO Executive Board, meeting in January 2022, nominated Dr Tedros to stand for a second term.

Dr Tedros’s new mandate officially commences on 16 August 2022. A Director-General can be re-appointed once, in accordance with World Health Assembly rules and procedures.

During his first term, Dr Tedros instituted a wide-ranging Transformation of the WHO, aimed at increasing the Organization’s efficiency driving impact at country level to promote healthier lives, protect more people in emergencies and increase equitable access to health. He also guided WHO’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic, outbreaks of Ebola in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the health impacts of multiple other humanitarian crises.

Before first being appointed WHO Director-General, Dr Tedros served as Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ethiopia from 2012–2016 and as Minister of Health, Ethiopia from 2005–2012. He had also served as chair of the Board of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; as chair of the Roll Back Malaria (RBM) Partnership Board; and as co-chair of the Board of the Partnership for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health.



More information: https://www.who.int/about/governance/election



Photos: Photos are available in the WHO photo gallery for media. To register (1) Select “Media registration” (2) Register as “client” (3) Choose the category “media.” For questions contact [email protected]
New sustainable financing model

Following the re-election of Dr Tedros Adhanhom Ghebreysus as WHO Director-General, delegates at the World Health Assembly agreed a landmark decision on sustainable financing for WHO, adopting a series of recommendations from a Sustainable Financing Working Group made up of WHO Member States.

The recommendations aim to make WHO’s funding more predictable and flexible, and less dependent on voluntary contributions. Amongst the recommendations is a request to the Secretariat to develop budget proposals for an increase in assessed contributions (membership dues) to 50% of WHO’s core budget by 2030. In the last budget cycle, assessed contributions made up only 16% of the approved Programme Budget.

Other recommendations include that the Secretariat explores the feasibility of a replenishment mechanism to further broaden WHO's financing base and the establishment of a Member States task group on strengthening WHO budgetary, programmatic and financing governance to analyze challenges in governance for transparency, efficiency, accountability and compliance.

Related links

Sustainable financing of WHO: report of the Working Group (Document A75/9)

Working toward a sustainably financed WHO

Programme Budget revision approved

Delegates had previously approved a revised Programme Budget for WHO for the work of the biennium 2022-2023. The revision approved today reflects the rapidly changing health situation of the world due to the COVID-19 pandemic, amongst other issues. The revised Programme Budget incorporates learnings and recommendations from a number of internal and external reviews, notably on the Secretariat’s response to COVID-19.

The total estimated budget increase for the biennium 2022–2023 is US$ 604.4 million (a 13% increase over the earlier budget presented), bringing the total budget for WHO’s work for 2022-2023 to US$ 4.968 billion. The previously approved 2020-2021 Programme Budget amounted to US$ 3.769 billion).

Delegates also agreed to extend the current Global Programme of Work to 2025, in light of the findings contained in WHO’s Results Framework as well as the report presented by the Secretariat on operational efficiencies. The extension is designed to help WHO support countries’ efforts to address disruptions to health services linked to the pandemic, recover from the pandemic and renew efforts to achieve the triple billion and Sustainable Development Goal targets .

This extension brings alignment between WHO’s strategic planning cycle and that of the wider United Nations family.

Related links

Proposed revision to the Programme Budget 2022–2023 (Document A75/6)

WHO Programme Budget web portal

Working group on international health regulations (IHR) amendments



Delegates welcomed the final report of the Working Group on strengthening WHO preparedness and response to health emergencies which, among other things, proposed a process for taking forward potential amendments to the IHR (2005). They agreed to continue the group, with a revised mandate and name (the “Working Group on IHR amendments” (WGIHR)) to work exclusively on consideration of proposed IHR amendments. Member States also requested the Director-General to convene an IHR Review Committee to make technical recommendations on the proposed amendments that may be submitted. The Working Group will propose a package of targeted amendments for consideration by the Seventy-seventh Health Assembly.



Related links

Strengthening WHO preparedness for and response to health emergencies Report by the Director-General (Document A75/17)
The Second Global COVID-19 Summit showed that the world could come together around a global public good – ending the COVID-19 pandemic, and establishing a solidarity-based system to prevent, prepare for and respond to future health emergencies.

The display of unity by the Summit co-hosts – Belize, Germany, Indonesia, Senegal, and the United States, representing CARICOM, the G7, the G20 and the African Union - and the concrete commitments made by governments, the private sector and civil society, is further evidence of a reignited common purpose.

As Co-Chairs of the council of the ACT-Accelerator, a multi-partner group aimed at developing and facilitating equitable access to COVID-19 tools, we welcome this strong evidence of our shared determination to bring the pandemic to an end and prepare better to prevent and respond to the next health emergency.

The number of COVID-19 cases is now increasing globally, indicating that the pandemic is far from over, particularly for high-risk groups in lower-income countries. The reduction in testing rates makes it harder to track the trajectory of the virus, making it more likely that new variants will go undetected.

At the Summit, global leaders pushed back against complacency and committed to investing in the rollout out of vaccines, strengthening health systems, and facilitating access to treatments and tests.

New commitments of around US$ 1 billion were made to ACT-A’s constituent agencies, including a generous fair share pledge from Canada, and contributions from Italy, Belgium, France, the European Commission, New Zealand, the UAE, Denmark and Colombia.

These are in addition to pledges made at the recent AMC Summit, Germany’s commitment to meet its fair share in March and Norway’s early contribution to kick off the second budget cycle. All these contributions will prove crucial in driving the partnership’s work to ensure equitable access to COVID-19 tools.

Building momentum for expanding access to oral antivirals, the Clinton Health Access Initiative (CHAI) announced at the Summit a lower price for the treatment nirmatrelvir/ ritonavir - known under the brand name Paxlovid - with CHAI committing to work with ACT-Accelerator agencies to accelerate delivery.

The G7 Summit at the end of June provides the final major opportunity to meet the remaining financing needs of the ACT-Accelerator. The projected funding gap is now US$ 12.1 billion – with US$ 7.5 billion especially urgent. A failure to fund the partnership’s remaining needs will see vulnerable people go unvaccinated, untested, untreated, and unprotected.

Fully funding the ACT-Accelerator will support its life-saving work to expand access to life-saving tools, from new oral antivirals to booster vaccine doses, to ensure the most at-risk are protected wherever they live in the world. No-one is safe until everyone is safe.

President Cyril Ramaphosa of South Africa

Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre of Norway
The WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has announced six awards today to recognize outstanding contributions to advancing global health, demonstrated leadership and commitment to regional health issues. Dr Tedros himself decides on the awardees for the World Health Organization Director-General’s Global Health Leaders Awards.



The ceremony for the awards, which were established in 2019, was part of the live-streamed high-level opening session of the 75th World Health Assembly.

“At a time when the world is facing an unprecedented convergence of inequity, conflict, food insecurity, the climate crisis and a pandemic, this award recognizes those who have made an outstanding contribution to protecting and promoting health around the world,” said Dr Tedros. “These awardees embody lifelong dedication, relentless advocacy, a commitment to equity, and selfless service of humanity.”

Honorees of the Global Health Leaders Awards

Dr Paul Farmer



Dr Farmer, who passed away in his sleep in February, 2022 in Rwanda, was Chair of the Department of Global Health and Social Medicine at Harvard Medical School and co-founder of Partners in Health. He was co-founder and chief strategist of Partners In Health, an international non-governmental organization established in 1987 to provide direct health care services, research and advocacy for those who are sick and living in poverty.

Dr. Farmer has written extensively on health, human rights, and the consequences of social inequality. Wingdie “Didi” Bertrand, co-­founder and President of Women and Girls Initiative, accepted the award on behalf of her late husband.

Dr Ahmed Hankir



A British-Lebanese psychiatrist, Dr Ahmed Hankir is Senior Research fellow at the Centre for Mental Health Research in association with Cambridge University and Academic Clinical Fellow in Psychiatry at the King’s College London in the United Kingdom. He also works in frontline psychiatry for the NHS at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and serves as Visiting Professor of Academic Psychiatry at the Carrick Institute for Graduate Studies in Cape Canaveral, in the United States of America.

While in medical school in the UK, he developed a debilitating episode of psychological distress, triggered by the traumatic events when living in Lebanon. He is author of The Wounded Healer, an anti-stigma program that blends the power of the performing arts and storytelling with psychiatry, which has been integrated into the medical school curriculum of four UK universities. He is also known for his work on Muslim mental health, islamophobia and violent extremism.



Ms Ludmila Sofia Oliveira Varela



A youth sports advocate from Cabo Verde and player of the Cabo Verde national volleyball team, Ms Oliviera Varela’s work to facilitate access to sports for all provides a healthy alternative to risky behaviors among young people, and tackles the growing threat of non-communicable diseases. She holds weekly training sessions for youths in Praia City.



In 2021 she was one of the finalists of the UNESCO global competition on the 'Power of Sport in a time of crisis' and she has received awards in several sports competitions in the African Region.



Polio workers in Afghanistan



Also honored were eight volunteer polio workers who were shot and killed by armed gunmen in Takhar and Kunduz provinces in Afghanistan on 24 February 2022. Four of these polio workers were women. The eight volunteers were reaching thousands of children through house-to-house campaigns in north-eastern Afghanistan.



Their work was crucial in a country where wild polio virus type 1 is still circulating. Their names were Mr. Mohamamd Zubair Khalazai, Mr Najibullah Kosha, Mr Shadab Yosufi, Mr Shareefullah Hemati, Mrs Haseeba Omari, Ms Khadija Attaee, Ms Munira Hakimi and Ms Robina Yosufi and her brother Shadab.



ASHA (Accredited Social Health Activist Workers)



ASHA (which means hope in Hindi) are the more than 1 million female volunteers in India, honored for their crucial role in linking the community with the health system, to ensure those living in rural poverty can access primary health care services, as shown throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.



ASHAs worked to provide maternal care and immunization for children against vaccine-preventable diseases; community health care; treatment for hypertension and tuberculosis; and core areas of health promotion for nutrition, sanitation, and healthy living.



Mr Yōhei Sasakawa

Mr Yōhei Sasakawa is the WHO Goodwill Ambassador for Leprosy Elimination, and Japan's Ambassador for the Human Rights of People Affected by leprosy. For more than 40 years, he has continued his global fight against leprosy as well as its stigma and social discrimination.



As chairman of The Nippon Foundation, Japan's largest charitable foundation, Mr Sasakawa has been a pioneer in guiding public-interest activities by the private sector in modern Japan.
WHO and partners are working to better understand the extent and cause of an outbreak of monkeypox. The virus is endemic in some animal populations in a number of countries, leading to occasional outbreaks among local people and travelers. The recent outbreaks reported across 11 countries so far are atypical, as they are occurring in non-endemic countries.



There are about 80 confirmed cases so far, and 50 pending investigations. More cases are likely to be reported as surveillance expands.



WHO is working with the affected countries and others to expand disease surveillance to find and support people who may be affected, and to provide guidance on how to manage the disease. We continue to convene meetings of experts and technical advisory groups (such as the meeting today of the Strategic & Technical Advisory Group on Infectious Hazards with Pandemic and Epidemic Potential [STAG-IH]) to share information on the disease and response strategies.

WHO continues to receive updates on the status of ongoing outbreaks in endemic countries.

Monkeypox spreads differently from COVID-19. WHO encourages people to stay informed from reliable sources, such as national health authorities, on the extent of the outbreak in their community (if any), symptoms and prevention.



As monkeypox spreads through close contact, the response should focus on the people affected and their close contacts. People who closely interact with someone who is infectious are at greater risk for infection: this includes health workers, household members and sexual partners.



Stigmatizing groups of people because of a disease is never acceptable. It can be a barrier to ending an outbreak as it may prevent people from seeking care, and lead to undetected spread.



As the situation is evolving, WHO will continue to provide updates we learn more.
COVAX has access to enough COVID-19 vaccines to help protect 70% of the population in 91 lower income countries.

Demand and uptake are low, with low-income countries remaining furthest behind.

To close the global vaccine equity gap, COVAX calls on countries to set ambitious targets for implementation and on all partners to ensure countries have the resources needed to accelerate and expand national strategies.

Nearly 18 months after the first administration of a COVID-19 vaccine, incredible progress has been made – with lower-income countries administering billions of COVID-19 vaccines in a historic global rollout that is unprecedented in terms of speed, scale and demographics reached. Yet despite this progress, and the easing of global supply constraints, inequities between lower and higher income countries are continuing to cost lives and are prolonging the pandemic by increasing the threat posed by the emergence of new, potentially more dangerous variants of the virus.

Only 16% of people in low-income countries have received a single vaccine dose – compared to 80% in high-income countries. In certain lower-income countries, many of the most at-risk people in society – healthcare workers, the elderly and those with underlying health conditions – are going unprotected while young, healthy adults receive booster doses in wealthier countries.

The world must act urgently to close this equity gap.

After a year of severe constraints, we are now in a situation that two years ago would have seemed impossible: namely global supply is now high enough to underpin the overarching objective of supporting equitable, full vaccination of all adult and adolescent populations globally. COVAX has access to more than enough doses needed to enable 91 lower-income countries that are supported by the COVAX Advance Market Commitment (AMC) – which provides donor-funded doses of a wide variety of COVID-19 vaccines – to meet their targets in light of the WHO global target of protecting 70% of the population in each country. We can support these countries to meet individual targets and prioritize full coverage of high-risk groups. In accordance with the updated SAGE roadmap of January 2022 – which recommends boosters for priority groups – COVAX is now open to and encouraging requests for doses for booster campaigns from countries.

COVAX is also well-placed to deliver these doses so they reach those in need. In just 15 months, COVAX – as the Vaccines Pillar of the ACT-Accelerator partnership for equitable access to COVID-19 tools – has shipped over 1.3 billion vaccines to 87 low and lower-middle income countries around the world. COVAX shipments account for 82% of vaccines delivered to low-income countries and the majority of COVID-19 vaccines administered in humanitarian settings. Through driving the fastest, largest and most complex global vaccination effort in history, COVAX’s work has helped raise the average proportion of people protected by a full course of vaccines in these low- and lower-middle income countries to 46%.

The onus now is on building on this foundation to help countries to fully protect high risk groups, meet national vaccination targets, and close the global COVID-19 vaccine equity gap for good. However, hurdles now remain: demand and uptake are low, with low-income countries remaining the furthest behind.

Demand and delivery

With more than 3.8 billion COVID-19 doses administered to-date, national governments in lower-income countries have led the way. The number of countries with coverage under 10% of the population has decreased from 34 in January to 18 today. Some AMC-supported countries – for example, Bhutan, Cambodia, Viet Nam, Maldives, Fiji and Bangladesh – have coverage above 70%.

Building on country readiness efforts undertaken so far, the countries furthest behind are receiving tailored support. In January 2022, WHO, UNICEF and Gavi established the COVID-19 Vaccine Delivery Partnership (CoVDP), an inter-agency initiative building on existing resources globally, regionally and in-country to support COVID-19 vaccine delivery in lower-income countries. CoVDP specifically provides urgent operational support to the 34 countries that were at or below 10% full vaccination coverage in January 2022, many of which are in Africa. By mid-April 2022, a total of US$29 million of urgent funding was coordinated and disbursed - within 15 working days or less - to ten countries across the three agencies. The CoVDP has driven political engagement with several countries with low vaccination rates to keep vaccine delivery on top of the political agenda and identify opportunities for bundling COVID-19 vaccinations with other health interventions.

While CoVDP and other efforts are helping lower-income countries make progress, challenges still need to be addressed. In many countries Omicron has reduced the perceived risk of the virus and there are other health priorities that people and governments are focused on. The option of integrating COVID-19 vaccination with other health systems activities – for example, measles and polio campaigns, or the distribution of malaria bed nets, – therefore becomes more important. COVID-19 vaccination is also an opportunity to strengthen health systems including training health workers, enhancing health management information systems, further improving the cold chain, and forging new ways of working in fragile and conflict settings.

Through our continuous dialogue with AMC-supported countries, we know that demand is highly dynamic and difficult to predict, even for countries themselves. Thanks to input from national governments, COVAX is able to make some initial estimates of overall demand from AMC-supported countries. From our analysis of the latest demand planning forecasts provided to us by these countries, estimated country demand from now through early 2023 currently stands at approximately 330 million doses from COVAX, in addition to what has already been delivered or accepted by countries. However, these continue to be dynamic figures, and will evolve with situations on the ground as well as the occurrence of new variants. As such, COVAX will be working with national governments to continuously update these estimates.

In order for the world to continue to make meaningful progress on closing the global vaccine equity gap, we urgently call on countries to set ambitious targets backed by concrete plans for implementation – prioritising full coverage of high risk groups – and on all partners to coordinate on providing countries with the resources needed to accelerate and expand national strategies, stimulate demand and overcome operational bottlenecks. The next 3-4 months are crucial for accelerating COVID-19 vaccination campaigns, alongside moving to integrate COVID-19 vaccination efforts into routine primary health systems.

Supply

It is testament to the ground-breaking work of the scientific and manufacturing communities that there is now enough global supply to meet needs, as is the fact that it took only 327 days to go from the SARS-CoV-2 virus being sequenced and published to bringing a COVID-19 vaccine into emergency use.

As we strive to help countries deploy more doses, we must also work ensure supply remains available, at the right times. COVAX experienced delays securing doses in 2021. With many doses from advance purchase agreements now becoming available alongside donated doses, and the dynamic nature of country demand coupled with global oversupply, it is highly likely that overall supply will exceed demand. However, COVAX is working with manufacturers to help make supply more responsive to the changing demand environment.

That both global and COVAX supply now exceed demand is an advantageous situation in a pandemic, as it guarantees all countries long term availability of supply and choice of product. Protecting populations rapidly must now take priority. This is fundamental, given that 2021 clearly demonstrated the impact ad hoc, unpredictable supply had on the ability for countries with more limited health systems resources to plan and roll-out vaccination campaigns. Certainty of supply enables countries to plan national vaccination campaigns with more confidence, ensures a rolling buffer of stock can be available in-country and aids smooth and efficient roll outs.

While every effort should be taken to minimize wastage and expiry, lower income countries should also be able to accept doses, and to aim high, without being stigmatized when there is wastage, which is an inevitable part of immunization efforts against any disease, in any country.

COVAX is committed to providing countries with long-term, predictable supply, catering to all contexts and maintaining reserves to ensure supply can keep up with shifts in demand. This includes working with manufacturers and donors to ensure any new, variant-adapted vaccines reach COVAX at the same time as higher income countries.

We call on donor countries and manufacturers to support COVAX by ensuring the volume and timing of deliveries match as closely as possible the needs of lower-income countries. Donors should support COVAX in maintaining a diverse portfolio, including variant-adapted vaccines if necessary. Manufacturers should work with COVAX to re-phase or re-size supply from existing advance purchase agreements.

A world beset by numerous challenges and crises does not change the fact that the pandemic – our collective crisis – is far from over. Closing the vaccine equity gap must continue to be an urgent priority for the international community.

NOTES TO EDITORS

About COVAX

COVAX, the vaccines pillar of the Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator, is co-led by CEPI, Gavi, WHO and UNICEF – working in partnership with developed and developing country vaccine manufacturers, PAHO, the World Bank, and others. It is the only global initiative that is working with governments and manufacturers to ensure equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines.

CEPI’s role in COVAX

CEPI is leading on the COVAX vaccine research and development portfolio, investing in R&D across a variety of promising candidate to support the development of safe and effective vaccines which can be made available to countries participating in the COVAX Facility. As part of this work, CEPI has secured first right of refusal for the COVAX Facility to access doses of multiple vaccines, and made strategic investments in vaccine manufacturing, which includes reserving capacity to manufacture doses of COVAX vaccines at a network of facilities. CEPI is also investing in ‘next generation’ and ‘variant-proof’ vaccine candidates, which will give the world additional options to control COVID-19 in the future.

Gavi’s role in COVAX

Gavi leads on procurement and delivery at scale for COVAX: designing and managing the COVAX Facility and the Gavi COVAX AMC and working with its traditional Alliance partners UNICEF and WHO, along with governments, on country readiness and delivery.

As part of this role, Gavi hosts the Office of the COVAX Facility to coordinate the operation and governance of the mechanism as a whole, holds financial and legal relationships with 193 Facility participants, and manages the COVAX Facility deals portfolio: negotiating advance purchase agreements with manufacturers of promising vaccine candidates to secure doses on behalf of all COVAX Facility participants.

Gavi also coordinates design, operationalisation and fundraising for the Gavi COVAX AMC, the mechanism that provides access to donor-funded doses of vaccine to 92 lower-income economies. As part of this work, Gavi provides funding and oversight for UNICEF procurement and delivery of vaccines to all AMC participants – operationalising the advance purchase agreements between Gavi and manufacturers – as well as support for partners’ and governments work on readiness and delivery. This includes tailored support to governments, UNICEF, WHO and other partners for cold chain equipment, technical assistance, syringes, vehicles, and other aspects of the vastly complex logistical operation for delivery. Gavi also co-designed, raises funds for and supports the operationalisation of the AMC’s no fault compensation mechanism as well as the COVAX Humanitarian Buffer.

WHO’s role in COVAX

WHO has multiple roles within COVAX: It provides normative guidance on vaccine policy, regulation, safety, R&D, allocation, and country readiness and delivery. Its Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization develops evidence-based immunization policy recommendations. Its Emergency Use Listing (EUL) / prequalification programmes ensure harmonized review and authorization across member states. It provides global coordination and member state support on vaccine safety monitoring. It developed the target product profiles for COVID-19 vaccines and provides R&D technical coordination. WHO leads, together with UNICEF, the Country Readiness and Delivery workstream, which provides support to countries as they prepare to receive and administer vaccines. Along with Gavi and numerous other partners working at the global, regional, and country-level, the CRD workstream provides tools, guidance, monitoring, and on the ground technical assistance for the planning and roll-out of the vaccines. Along with COVAX partners, WHO has developed a no-fault compensation scheme as part of the time-limited indemnification and liability commitments.

UNICEF’s role in COVAX

UNICEF is leveraging its experience as the largest single vaccine buyer in the world and working with manufacturers and partners on the procurement of COVID-19 vaccine doses, as well as freight, logistics and storage. UNICEF already procures more than 2 billion doses of vaccines annually for routine immunisation and outbreak response on behalf of nearly 100 countries. In collaboration with the PAHO Revolving Fund, UNICEF is leading efforts to procure and supply doses of COVID-19 vaccines for COVAX. In addition, UNICEF, Gavi and WHO are working with governments around the clock to ensure that countries are ready to receive the vaccines, with appropriate cold chain equipment in place and health workers trained to dispense them. UNICEF is also playing a lead role in efforts to foster trust in vaccines, delivering vaccine confidence communications and tracking and addressing misinformation around the world.

About ACT-Accelerator

The Access to COVID-19 Tools ACT-Accelerator, is a new, ground-breaking global collaboration to accelerate the development, production, and equitable access to COVID-19 tests, treatments, and vaccines. It was set up in response to a call from G20 leaders in March and launched by the WHO, European Commission, France and The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation in April 2020.

The ACT-Accelerator is not a decision-making body or a new organisation, but works to speed up collaborative efforts among existing organisations to end the pandemic. It is a framework for collaboration that has been designed to bring key players around the table with the goal of ending the pandemic as quickly as possible through the accelerated development, equitable allocation, and scaled up delivery of tests, treatments and vaccines, thereby protecting health systems and restoring societies and economies in the near term. It draws on the experience of leading global health organisations which are tackling the world’s toughest health challenges, and who, by working together, are able to unlock new and more ambitious results against COVID-19. Its members share a commitment to ensure all people have access to all the tools needed to defeat COVID-19 and to work with unprecedented levels of partnership to achieve it.

The ACT-Accelerator has four areas of work: diagnostics, therapeutics, vaccines and the health system connector. Cross-cutting all of these is the workstream on Access & Allocation.
Today, the World Health Organization (WHO) issued an emergency use listing (EUL) for CONVIDECIA, a vaccine manufactured by CanSino Biologics, China, adding to a growing portfolio of vaccines validated by WHO for the prevention of COVID-19 caused by SARS-CoV-2.



WHO’s EUL procedure assesses the quality, safety and efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines as a prerequisite for COVAX vaccine supply. It also allows countries to expedite their own regulatory approval to import and administer COVID-19 vaccines.



CONVIDECIA was assessed under the WHO EUL procedure based on the review of data on quality, safety, efficacy, a risk management plan, programmatic suitability and a manufacturing site inspection conducted by WHO. The Technical Advisory Group for Emergency Use Listing, convened by WHO and made up of regulatory experts from around the world, has determined that the vaccine meets WHO standards for protection against COVID-19 and that the benefits of the vaccine far outweigh risks.



CONVIDECIA is based on a modified human adenovirus that expresses the spike S protein of SARS-CoV-2. It is administered as a single dose.



CONVIDECIA was also reviewed earlier this month by WHO’s Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE), which formulates vaccine specific policies and recommendations for vaccines’ use in populations (i.e. recommended age groups, intervals between shots, specific groups such as pregnant and lactating women).



The SAGE recommends use of the vaccine as a single (0.5ml) dose, in all age groups 18 and above.

CONVIDECIA was found to have 58% efficacy against symptomatic disease and 92% against severe COVID-19.



WHO emergency use listing



The emergency use listing (EUL) procedure assesses the suitability of novel health products during public health emergencies. The objective is to make medicines, vaccines and diagnostics available as rapidly as possible to address the emergency while adhering to stringent criteria of safety, efficacy and quality. The assessment weighs the threat posed by the emergency as well as the benefit that would accrue from the use of the product against any potential risks.



The EUL pathway involves a rigorous assessment of late phase II and phase III clinical trial data as well as substantial additional data on safety, efficacy, quality and a risk management plan. These data are reviewed by independent experts and WHO teams who consider the current body of evidence on the vaccine under consideration, the plans for monitoring its use, and plans for further studies.

As part of the EUL process, the company producing the vaccine must commit to continue to generate data to enable full licensure and WHO prequalification of the vaccine. The WHO prequalification process will assess additional clinical data generated from vaccine trials and deployment on a rolling basis to ensure the vaccine consistently meets the necessary standards of quality, safety and efficacy for broader availability.

See all EUL listings



SAGE



SAGE is the principal advisory group to WHO for vaccines and immunization. It is charged with advising WHO on overall global policies and strategies, ranging from vaccines and immunization technology, research and development, to delivery of immunization and its linkages with other health interventions. SAGE is concerned not just with childhood vaccines and immunization, but all vaccine-preventable diseases.



SAGE assesses evidence on safety, efficacy, effectiveness, impact and programmatic suitability, considering both individual and public health impact. SAGE Interim recommendations for EUL products provide guidance for national vaccination policy makers. These recommendations are updated as additional evidence becomes available and as there are changes to the epidemiology of disease and the availability of additional vaccines and other disease control interventions.

See SAGE interim recommendations

CORRIGENDUM. Please note this webpage was updated on 23 May 2022 to give the efficacy rate after 28 days.
The World Health Organization, with the support of the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization and its COVID-19 Vaccines Working Group, continues to review the emerging evidence on the need for and timing of additional booster doses for the currently available COVID-19 vaccines which have received Emergency Use Listing (EUL). The statements and conclusions in this document will be updated as new data become available.



The objective of this statement is to review the evidence on additional booster doses. In considering additional booster doses, there are two main scenarios to assess: 1) the use of additional booster doses in those who are not able to mount and sustain adequate immune responses and 2) considerations for additional booster doses to be administered in order to protect high risk populations and health workers in order to maintain the health system during periodic waves of disease surges.



WHO's current Recommendations: (1) initial booster doses:



Booster doses should be offered based on evidence that doing so would have substantial impact on reducing hospitalization, severe disease and death, and to protect health systems. The order of implementing booster doses to different population groups should follow that which has been laid out for the primary vaccination series – i.e., booster doses should be prioritized for higher priority-use groups before lower priority-use groups, unless there is adequate justification not to do so. Such justification may include programmatic constraints or acceptability obstacles to uptake in higher priority-use groups that would result in vaccine wastage. In such cases, strategies should be prioritized to improve vaccine delivery, community engagement, and social mobilization efforts to reach higher priority-use groups.



Within a given priority-use group, primary series vaccination will have greater impact per dose than additional doses. Across priority-use groups, the benefits of additional doses for higher priority-use groups versus primary series doses for lower priority-use groups depends on country conditions, including supply and roll-out timelines, past epidemic dynamics and infection-induced immunity, vaccine product, vaccine effectiveness, and waning of protection. When high primary series coverage rates have been achieved among subgroups at higher risk of severe disease and death (e.g., older adults), additional doses for these subgroups may yield greater reductions in severe disease and death than use of equivalent vaccine supply for primary series vaccination of lower priority-use groups.



The optimal interval between completion of a primary series and administration of additional doses has yet to be determined, and depends on epidemiological setting, vaccine product, targeted age groups, background seroprevalence, and circulation and frequency of specific variant of concerns (VoC). As a general principle, an interval of 4–6 months since completion of the primary series could be considered, especially in the context of Omicron.



Booster doses should be considered for all COVID-19 vaccines having received EUL as per WHO’s product specific interim recommendations.



WHO`s current Recommendations: (2) Additional Doses in Immunocompromised persons

Available data for WHO EUL COVID-19 vaccine products suggest that vaccine effectiveness and immunogenicity are lower in immunocompromised persons (ICPs), compared to persons without immunocompromising conditions. An additional dose included in an extended primary series enhances immune responses in some ICPs (2, 3). Given the significant risk of severe COVID-19 for ICPs, if infected, WHO has already issued a recommendation for an extended primary series (i.e. third dose) as well as a booster dose (i.e. fourth dose) for ICPs, for all COVID-19 vaccines (1, 4). Homologous (same vaccine platform) and heterologous (different vaccine platform) vaccines can be used for such booster doses (5).



Considerations for additional booster doses beyond the first booster (< 6 months since first booster)



Additional booster doses beyond the first booster dose are currently being offered by some countries (i.e. fourth dose to older adults and a fifth dose for immunocompromised persons). Data on the usefulness of these additional booster doses is sparse and especially limited on the duration of further protection. Data on additional booster doses as of May 2022 only exists for the mRNA vaccines, and not for other vaccine platforms. Hence, in the following we only focus on the evidence with regards to additional booster for mRNA vaccines, while encouraging more data to be accrued for all vaccine platforms.



Seven studies were available for review, six of which were from Israel (6-11) and one from Canada (12). All were conducted during a time when Omicron has been the predominant circulating strain globally. While the studies vary in their design and population investigated, most evaluated the relative effectiveness of a fourth dose 4 months after a 3rd dose of mRNA vaccine compared to those who received 3 doses. This relative vaccine effectiveness only provides evidence on the value of a fourth dose compared to individuals who already have some vaccine induced protection (3 dose recipients). The relative vaccine effectiveness depends upon the initial VE provided by 3 doses and how much subsequent waning has occurred. In contrast, earlier studies provide an absolute vaccine effectiveness comparing vaccinated versus unvaccinated individuals. The Canadian study is the only available study that provides data on absolute vaccine effectiveness (i.e., compares 4th dose schedule to those who are unvaccinated). Additionally, the maximum follow up in the available studies was short and ranged from two weeks to ten weeks after the fourth dose.



Of the seven studies that investigated the use of a 4th dose of mRNA COVID vaccine, two reported specifically on outcomes of infection and any symptomatic disease (10, 11). Both studies were conducted in Israel and included health workers (HWs) as their population of interest. One study showed an increased IgG antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding domain and neutralizing antibody titers by a factor of 9-10 measured after fourth dose of vaccine. This corresponded to antibody titers that were slightly higher than those achieved after the third dose, with no significant difference between the two mRNA vaccines (11). The second study investigated breakthrough infections in HWs who received 3 doses of BNT162b2 vaccine and provided a comparison to those who received a fourth dose of BNT162b2. In fourth dose recipients, there was a reduction in breakthrough infection rates compared to that observed after only a 3rd dose of mRNA vaccine (10).



Of the remaining five studies, all were conducted in individuals older than 60 years of age, excluding individuals who had previous SARS-Co-2 infection and specifically evaluated mRNA vaccines. Two of the studies were retrospective cohort studies using administrative data. The first study found that the relative vaccine effectiveness against severe disease to be 66% (95% CI, 57-72) 15 to 21 days after a fourth dose and 77% (95% CI, 62-86) 36-42 days after a fourth dose (6). The second retrospective cohort study reported on death as the outcome measure and found a relative vaccine effectiveness of 78% (95% CI 72-83) 7 or more days post fourth dose. The absolute risk reduction conferred by the fourth dose was 0.07% in the study (9). The third study used a test negative design and reported on severe disease. They found a relative vaccine effectiveness of 87% (95% CI 0-98) 49-69 days post fourth booster. This study reported that severe disease was a relatively rare event, occurring among <1% of both fourth dose and third dose only recipients (8). The fourth study reviewed was a target trial (application of trial design principles from RCTs to the analysis of observational data(13)) that provided outcome data for hospitalization, severe disease and death. They found a relative vaccine effectiveness of 62% (95% CI, 50 to 74) against severe COVID-19, and 74% (95% CI, 50 to 90) against COVID-19 related death comparing 3 dose recipients to 4 dose recipients. A further analysis of the risk of severe COVID-19 from 7 days to 30 days post fourth dose was 42.1 events per 100,000 persons, as compared with 110.8 events per 100,000 persons in the 3 dose recipient control group. This corresponds to a difference in risk of 68.8 cases per 100,000 persons (95% CI, 48.5 to 91.9)(7).



The final study, conducted in Canada, investigated not only the relative vaccine effectiveness but also the absolute vaccine effectiveness when compared to unvaccinated individuals, two dose recipients as well as three dose recipients. This study found that with each additional dose, VE increased for severe disease. Absolute VE was 82% (95%CI 75-88%) as measured more than 84 days after third dose, and 92% (95%CI 87-95%) for fourth dose recipients at greater than 7 days after the fourth dose (12).



Taken together, these studies show some short-term benefit of an additional booster dose of mRNA vaccine in health workers, those over 60 years of age or with immunocompromising conditions. Data to support an additional dose for healthy younger populations are limited; preliminary data suggest that in younger people, the benefit is minimal. Moreover, follow-up time after the additional booster dose was limited, thereby precluding conclusions about duration of protection after this dose. Therefore, there is a lack of data to guide some important questions for making policy decisions. The limited available data suggest that for highest risk groups there is a benefit that supports the administration of an additional booster dose.

Administering an additional booster dose likely comes with considerable programmatic challenges in terms of vaccine delivery in many settings. The financial and opportunity cost of such programmes must also be carefully weighed against the limited incremental benefit of an additional booster dose. In those most at risk for severe disease or death (i.e. adults above the age of 60 years, or those who are not able to mount a full immune response), the additional benefit of an additional booster dose of mRNA vaccine might be warranted.



Considerations for future additional doses:



For longer-term considerations, there are significant uncertainties related to the evolution of the virus and the characteristics of future variants. Given widespread transmission of Omicron globally, continued viral evolution with the emergence of new variants or sub lineages as is already being seen. Development of a pan-SARS-CoV-2 or pan-sarbecovirus vaccines are needed, but the timeframe for their development is uncertain (14). Meanwhile, the composition of the currently available COVID-19 vaccines may need to be updated to offer better protection against new VOCs which may be antigenically distinct (14). Current vaccines based on the index virus appear to maintain high VE against severe disease also in the context of current variants of concerns, but VE estimates against infection and symptomatic diseases are lower against Omicron. Any update to vaccine composition would aim to elicit greater breadth in the immune response against circulating and emerging variants, in addition to retaining protection against severe disease and death. The performance of any updated vaccine(s) may vary depending on the nature and magnitude of previously acquired immunity, recognizing that this immunity will be dependent upon different VOCs, different types of vaccines and their timing of administration.



While seasonality is not yet fully established for SARS-COV-2, evidence from the past two years support the notion of more substantial transmission during the winter season. Therefore, for countries with either a Northern or Southern Hemisphere winter season, plans for catch-up to improve primary series coverage and boosting for those at highest risk, campaigns should take seasonality into account. In addition, in view of the uncertainty of the characteristics of new VOC, which may emerge rapidly, there may be value in establishing vaccine induced immunity using existing vaccines (i.e. index virus) complemented by a booster dose of variant vaccine to broaden the immunological response. The Technical Advisory Group on COVID-19 Vaccine Composition will provide advice on updated vaccine composition when data is available.



To that end, in order to make sound policy decisions, data will need to be generated on the performance of current and variant-specific candidate COVID-19 vaccines, including the VE, immunogenicity and safety of an additional booster dose over time and by disease outcome and priority use groups. More research is needed on the breadth, magnitude, and durability of humoral and cell-mediated immune responses to variants. Also needed is evidence to address other gaps in the evidence regarding the need for additional booster doses, which includes the duration of VE of inactivated, subunit and viral vectored vaccines over time and by disease outcome. Finally, an understanding of the vaccine correlates of protection and correlates of durability of protection in persons with and without previous COVID-19 infection would assist policy makers in creating sound programmatic decisions.



SAGE as well as the Technical Advisory Group on COVID-19 Vaccine Composition continue to monitor the situation carefully and the WHO position will be updated accordingly.

References:
Healthcare professionals and public health authorities have a central role in discussing vaccination against COVID-19 with their patients. Vaccines play a critical role in preventing deaths, and hospitalisation caused by infectious diseases, and are contributing to controlling the spread of the disease, thus their impact on infection and serious illness is significant. Both vaccinated and unvaccinated people also need to be aware of the additional protective behaviours required to control the pandemic locally.



The global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in an unprecedented level of public interest in vaccines. This includes a focus on the development of vaccines and their regulatory review and safety monitoring. Much of this coverage has taken place through mass and social media. Reports of adverse events (side effects) have led some people to express concerns about getting vaccinated, delay getting vaccinated or be strongly opposed to vaccination. There are also differences in individual confidence in national safety monitoring systems. Another challenge in communicating the importance of COVID-19 vaccination is that in many, but not all, children and young adults are less clinically affected by COVID-19 infection and therefore some may see limited value in vaccinating this population. Clear and consistent communication of evidence and uncertainties is therefore essential to support people in making the critical choice to be vaccinated.



We appreciate that you, your colleagues and your patients may have a number of questions around the development, regulatory review and ongoing safety monitoring of COVID-19 vaccines.

Purpose

This joint International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities (ICMRA)* and World Health Organization (WHO) statement aims to help healthcare professionals answer questions about the role of regulators in the oversight of COVID-19 vaccines. It explains how vaccines undergo robust scientific evaluation to determine their safety, efficacy and quality and how safety is closely and continually monitored after approval.

Vaccination has been shown to contribute to reducing deaths and severe illness from COVID-19, and to reduce the transmission of COVID-19. Vaccinating as many people as possible and reducing the spread of disease is important. Vaccination of a significant proportion of the population also protects vulnerable people, including those who cannot receive vaccines, or the small proportion of people who might remain at risk of infection after vaccination. Failure to vaccinate widely also enables continued circulation of the virus and the generation of variants, including some that may pose a greater risk. Widespread vaccination has contributed to fewer people getting sick and being hospitalised, ultimately alleviating the burden of COVID-19 on healthcare systems. It has also helped allow the move back to normal societal functioning and the re-opening of economies.

Vaccines and the regulatory process

How do regulatory authorities evaluate COVID-19 vaccines? Regulators rigorously evaluate scientific and clinical evidence provided by vaccine manufacturers. Vaccine manufactures are legally obliged to follow defined standards in the data they provide, and their clinical research and manufacturing operations are subject to regulatory oversight. Either full or summary data from clinical trials is made available to regulators as part of vaccine evaluation. Each vaccine is thoroughly assessed for safety, efficacy and quality to determine whether it can be approved for use. Regulators use available scientific evidence from preclinical laboratory research, human clinical trials, and manufacturing information to assess benefits and risks of candidate vaccines. Regulators have collaborated extensively with other global regulatory counterparts in premarket and safety reviews.



Regulators may seek additional expert advice from independent scientific advisory committees to help inform their decision on whether to approve a vaccine. These committees are made up of experts in science, medicine (including infectious diseases) and public health, and often include consumer and healthcare professional representatives. Public health agencies have a different role to regulatory authorities. They develop and deliver vaccination programmes, often working with their expert immunisation technical advisory committees. This includes prioritising and designating populations for vaccination with specific vaccines, issuing additional recommendations and providing information more broadly about vaccines and immunization. They also collaborate with regulators to monitor the safety of vaccines after they are approved for use. Globally, the public can have confidence in the rigour of the process used to scientifically evaluate the safety, efficacy and quality of vaccines before they are approved for use in the wider population.



Safety evidence prior to potential regulatory authorisation

Safety evidence is an essential part of each regulatory submission for a COVID-19 vaccine. It is gathered during all phases of the vaccine development process. Robust assessment of safety is carried out in the clinical trials and submitted to regulators for review as part of the approval process.

All adverse events need to be examined and reported in the regulatory submission by the companies for a marketing authorisation. Typically, regulators will require that participants in clinical trials have been followed for generally at least 2 months after receiving their final vaccine dose for decisions made under emergency or provisional or conditional approval processes, with longer follow up required before full market authorisation is granted. One year or longer safety data are now available for many of the most widely used vaccines. While rare adverse events might not be recognised until after wide population use, based on both the current experience with COVID-19 vaccines and previous experience with other vaccines, most adverse events occur days to a few weeks of vaccination and will be identified in clinical trials. There will also be longer term (for example 1 to 2 years) follow up of those who participated in the clinical trials of each vaccine, which is standard practice in clinical trials, as well as population wide observational safety studies. Safety data from these longer-term trials and population studies are being carefully reviewed by regulators as part of post approval monitoring of safety. International regulators collaborate on the review of safety allowing an increase in the size of the populations for which safety data can be assessed.

Efficacy

Apart from information on the types of immune responses induced by the vaccine, companies must submit data from well-designed clinical trials to regulators to demonstrate that the vaccine prevents COVID-19. The data showed there were sufficient numbers of people included in the clinical trials receiving the vaccine so that the efficacy of the vaccine can be accurately measured (generally at least 10,000 and usually 15,000 or more people who receive the vaccine, in addition to those in the control arm). Populations in clinical trials should include a range of age groups and people with co-morbidities. Given the disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on older people, COVID-19 vaccine clinical trials have included significant numbers of older participants.

Vaccine clinical trials for a new candidate vaccine showed that vaccines very significantly reduced COVID-19 in people who were vaccinated, compared to a control group of people who did not receive the vaccine, through a reduction in numbers of laboratory confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections. Since the population-wide roll out of COVID-19 vaccines commenced in December 2020, a significant number of effectiveness studies have been published in refereed international medical journals. The population wide effectiveness data have been in line with the findings of the clinical trial results and shown high effectiveness against infection and even higher effectiveness against serious illness, hospitalisation or death from COVID-19 infection. Progressive waning of the effectiveness of one or two doses, particularly against mild infection and against the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant has emphasised the importance of a third booster vaccination.

For COVID-19 vaccines, it is becoming increasingly difficult to conduct placebo-controlled disease endpoint efficacy trials in some countries, as few individuals are willing and available to participate. Appropriately designed immuno-bridging studies are an acceptable alternative approach for authorising vaccines including for variants, boosters and paediatric populations. Neutralising antibody titres may be a suitable primary endpoint to predict vaccine effectiveness. The applicant for regulatory approval must also have justified the choice of appropriate vaccine comparators, statistical criteria and population comparator groups (for example, matched by age, gender, prior vaccination/infection status). Efficacy data should also include characterisation of comparative immunogenicity profiles, including cell-mediated immunity and characterisation of comparative in vitro neutralisation against Variants of Concern.



Quality

Any COVID-19 vaccine that receives regulatory authorisation must be manufactured according to internationally accepted stringent regulatory standards of good manufacturing practices (GMP). Regulators review data to confirm that the manufacturing process at each production site is well controlled and consistent. This will include data on the composition and purity of the vaccine and its potency, as well as data on every step of manufacturing and on the controls used to ensure that each batch of vaccine is consistently of a high quality. Data on vaccine stability must also be provided before a vaccine can be approved. After approval, batches may also undergo evaluation by individual national regulatory authorities to ensure they meet national requirements, before they can be supplied. Monitoring safety and effectiveness after vaccine approval



After a vaccine is approved for use, regulators conduct robust effectiveness monitoring as well as monitoring of safety and risk minimisation activities (pharmacovigilance). They need to continuously monitor vaccine safety to ensure that the benefits of the vaccine continue to outweigh the risks. Regulators do this by:

Reviewing and analysing adverse events reported by healthcare professionals and consumers and requiring industry vaccine companies (sometimes called “sponsors”) to report to regulators on adverse events received both within the regulator’s home country and globally;

Many regulators have implemented enhanced passive surveillance systems. These include systems to rapidly compare numbers of suspected adverse events reported with vaccines to the number of events expected to occur by chance, and includes access to near real-time data on vaccine usage in different settings. Several regulators have also implemented traceability systems for different vaccine brands and batches;

Taking rapid action to mitigate risks, also considering the information about emerging safety issues that is shared among regulators and researchers through international collaboration;

Reviewing medical literature and other sources of new safety information;

Requiring vaccine manufacturers to continue safety surveillance from the ongoing clinical trials of their products; and

Many regulators also require vaccine manufacturers to have risk management plans describing how they will monitor and minimise risks associated with their vaccines, including post authorisation safety studies that will continue to evaluate the safety and benefit-risk of their vaccine.

There has been a significant commitment by healthcare professionals and hospitals to report any adverse events they see in their patients, and it is important that this continues. Reporting of all relevant events helps regulators assess the possible role of the vaccine in causing the adverse event and assists in identifying safety issues relating to newly introduced vaccines. As part of the safety monitoring and review of all suspected adverse events reported for vaccines, regulators have developed lists of “Adverse Events of Special Interest”. These lists include some events that have been associated with other vaccines or could be theoretically linked to the COVID-19 vaccines. They may be included on these lists because they are serious events that are important to monitor closely, even though there may be no evidence that a particular adverse event is causally associated with specific vaccines. Having information on the background rates of these events that would be expected in people who have not received a vaccine, will help ensure that any increased reporting of these events can be quickly detected, thoroughly reviewed and investigated by regulators.



The widespread use of COVID-19 vaccines, including in the elderly and in patients with underlying health conditions, means that there have been deaths and serious illnesses that are purely coincidental and unrelated to vaccinations. The job of each regulator, often supported by independent committees of relevant medical experts together with vaccine manufacturers, is to review the cases and determine if there are potential safety signals with the vaccines. There is a special focus on monitoring safety in some groups of people that may not have been included in clinical trials or included as a small number, such as pregnant women, persons with severe pre-existing illness, older people, children, and in people also receiving vaccines for prevention of other diseases. Regulators, often in collaboration with public health authorities, can take decisive action if a safety issue is identified. These actions can include issuing safety communications for patients, healthcare professionals and the community; updating the product information or consumer information for the vaccine; preventing the release of a particular batch of vaccine; and, taking other regulatory actions such as restriction of vaccine authorisation to a particular subgroup of the community or revocation of authorisation. Regulators approve and maintain an approval of a vaccine only if they determine that the known and potential benefits of the vaccine outweigh its known and potential risks.



Commonly reported adverse events

The most commonly reported adverse events with COVID-19 vaccines are expected vaccine side effects, such as headache, fatigue, muscle and joint pain, fever and chills and pain at the site of injection. The occurrence of these adverse events is consistent with what is already known about the vaccines from clinical trials.

Adverse events of special interest associated with specific vaccines mRNA vaccines



The most significant adverse events of special interest reported for these vaccines, which include the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines are myocarditis, pericarditis and anaphylaxis. Myocarditis is inflammation of the heart muscle while pericarditis is an inflammation of the membrane around the heart. They can occur as very rare adverse events after vaccination with mRNA vaccines. Cases typically occur within 10 days, with symptom onset often within 5 days of vaccination. Pericarditis symptoms may occur later, typically 2 to 3 weeks after vaccination. Myocarditis and pericarditis are often mild, and symptoms usually resolve after a short time with standard treatment and rest. Some cases are more serious and need to be treated in hospital, but very few cases require intensive care.



Myocarditis has most often been reported after the second dose in 12 to 17 year old boys and men under 30. Several countries have observed higher reporting rates of myocarditis with those vaccinated with the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine than the Pfizer vaccine, but the reported difference in rates has differed between studies and countries may be influenced by a variety of factors. The benefit-risk of both of the vaccines remains positive. Pericarditis following a mRNA vaccine tends to occur at an older median age than myocarditis, but it is nonetheless more common in people under 50 years of age than in older people.

Myocarditis and pericarditis can occur after a booster dose, but this is so far reported to be more rare than after the primary doses. There is no indication that these events are more serious than after earlier doses.

Anaphylaxis has been reported with mRNA vaccines (and other COVID-19 vaccines). Anaphylaxis reports remain very rare (in the order of 1 case per 100,000 people vaccinated). Routine vaccination procedures include keeping people under observation for at least 15 minutes after vaccination and having appropriate medical treatment on hand so that anaphylaxis can be rapidly managed. Vaccines should not be given to people with a known history of a severe allergic reaction to any of the vaccine components. A second dose of any vaccine should not be given to those people who have experienced anaphylaxis after the first dose of a COVID-19 vaccine. Adenovirus vector vaccines



These include the AstraZeneca, Janssen, Gamaleya and CanSino Biologics COVID-19 vaccines. The most significant adverse events of special interest reported for these vaccines are Thrombosis with Thrombocytopenia Syndrome (TTS), Immune Thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and Guillain-Barre Syndrome (GBS). TTS is a very rare, but serious clotting syndrome involving thromboembolic events (blood clots) with thrombocytopenia (low blood platelet count). TTS symptoms usually start between 4 to 30 days after vaccination. It occurs in about 2 out of every 100,000 people after a first dose. The risk of TTS after a second vaccine dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine appears to be much lower and is under 0.5 of every 100,000 people after a second dose. Younger women, and people under 60 years seem to be slightly more likely to have serious outcomes from TTS as they more often experience clots in unusual locations, such as the brain or abdomen. Thromboembolic events with thrombocytopenia have also been reported in the United States for the Janssen vaccine, at a rate of about 2 to 3 per million doses administered.



Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) and Guillain-Barre Syndrome (GBS) have been reported in about one in every 100,000 people following the AstraZeneca and Janssen vaccines. ITP is a rare immune reaction that occurs when platelets are mistakenly destroyed by the immune system. In suspected ITP following vaccination with the AstraZeneca vaccine, patients had an extremely low platelet count, and signs of thrombocytopenia which may include unusual bruising, a nosebleed and/or blood blisters in the mouth. About 5% of people with ITP develop severe bleeding. In a very small number of people, it can be fatal. GBS is a rare but sometimes serious (and rarely fatal) immune disorder affecting the nerves and can result in pain, numbness, muscle weakness and difficulty walking. GBS can occur when the immune system is activated and has been associated with infections, including SARS-CoV-2, and vaccines. GBS typically occurs days or weeks after an infection or vaccination. However, sometimes a trigger for GBS cannot be identified.



Several other COVID-19 vaccines have also been authorised in some other countries. Less information is available internationally about adverse events for other manufactured vaccines. Regulators monitor and carefully review if there is a causal relationship between any of the vaccines associated with adverse events, and, if appropriate, information will be included in Product Information / Product Label of vaccines of concern. Health care professionals are encouraged to check the approved Product label/ product information or Fact Sheets for the vaccine in their country for safety information specific to the vaccines they are administering. In addition, where a new safety issue is identified regulators communicate this to health care professionals and consumers through alerts on their websites and through social media.



Questions and Answers on COVID-19 vaccines Q: How have the vaccines been developed so quickly? Does this mean that their safety and efficacy has been compromised?



A: The speed of development of COVID-19 vaccines has been unprecedented for several reasons, but the safety and efficacy requirements for vaccines have not been compromised, Vaccine development was facilitated by: New technologies adapted from the development of other vaccines – mRNA vaccines were developed for COVID-19 very rapidly after the sequence of the COVID-19 virus was determined, but the underlying technology had been under development since much longer and therefore production could be scaled up very quickly. The adenovirus technology used for adenovirus vector vaccines was first tested with SARS, MERS and Ebola virus over thelast 20 years, and so was able to be adapted quickly to COVID-19, which has several similarities to these viruses.

– mRNA vaccines were developed for COVID-19 very rapidly after the sequence of the COVID-19 virus was determined, but the underlying technology had been under development since much longer and therefore production could be scaled up very quickly. The adenovirus technology used for adenovirus vector vaccines was first tested with SARS, MERS and Ebola virus over thelast 20 years, and so was able to be adapted quickly to COVID-19, which has several similarities to these viruses. Clinical trial successes - it has been possible to rapidly recruit large numbers of volunteers into clinical trials and, with unfortunately high rates of infection in several countries, to complete trials with 10,000 to 50,000 people in a short period of time. Under normal circumstances, it may take many months or even a few years to carry out trials of this size to determine whether a vaccine is effective.

- it has been possible to rapidly recruit large numbers of volunteers into clinical trials and, with unfortunately high rates of infection in several countries, to complete trials with 10,000 to 50,000 people in a short period of time. Under normal circumstances, it may take many months or even a few years to carry out trials of this size to determine whether a vaccine is effective. Very close collaboration - between regulators internationally, industry and clinical researchers enabled clear indications of regulatory requirements and early access to results.

- between regulators internationally, industry and clinical researchers enabled clear indications of regulatory requirements and early access to results. Intensive and insightful research - researchers predicted that the “spike protein” on the virus would be a good target for vaccine development, and almost all vaccines have been designed to induce a response to this protein. So far, the spike protein has produced a strong immune response in those vaccinated, and for those vaccines that have reported clinical results have been shown to be highly protective from COVID-19 disease.

- researchers predicted that the “spike protein” on the virus would be a good target for vaccine development, and almost all vaccines have been designed to induce a response to this protein. So far, the spike protein has produced a strong immune response in those vaccinated, and for those vaccines that have reported clinical results have been shown to be highly protective from COVID-19 disease. The massive financial investment by governments, industry and philanthropic organisations in vaccine development and the redirection of much of the global research and commercial infrastructure for the development and manufacture of vaccines has taken place. Governments also enabled companies to take the commercial risk of manufacturing some vaccine stocks ahead of regulatory approvals.

by governments, industry and philanthropic organisations in vaccine development and the redirection of much of the global research and commercial infrastructure for the development and manufacture of vaccines has taken place. Governments also enabled companies to take the commercial risk of manufacturing some vaccine stocks ahead of regulatory approvals. Real world safety experience. As of March 2022, about 11 billion doses of COVID-19 vaccines have been administered globally, and so there is an immense global data base on the safety of these vaccines. The benefit-risk ratio remains overwhelmingly positive. Q: Will mRNA vaccines affect the DNA of vaccine recipients?

A: No. The mRNA in the vaccine has not been shown to incorporate itself into the genes of vaccine recipients and breaks down in the weeks after vaccination. mRNA vaccines contain genetic instructions for our cells, which only read them and provide copies of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. This enables the body’s natural immune systems to cause a response in vaccine recipients if they are later exposed to the virus.

Q: How long will COVID-19 vaccination provide protection for immunised people?

A: A number of “real world” vaccine effectiveness studies have provided information on the duration of protection from different COVID-19 vaccines. Two doses of the major mRNA and adenovirus vaccines provided strong (over 75 %) protection from serious illness,hospitalisation and death from the alpha, delta and original (wild type) SARS-COV-2 variants for 6 months. However, with emergence of the Omicron variant in late November 2021, evidence suggests that a third (booster vaccination) is required to restore and maintain protection against serious illness or death. Early results indicate that protection against serious illness or death is maintained for many months or longer after a third vaccination, and at present, there is not a widespread view that a fourth vaccination (second booster) is required to maintain immunity, except for in people who are immunocompromised. While those who become infected with SARS-CoV-2 following primary vaccination typically experience milder illness, protection against the level of severity of infection does seem to decrease over time without a booster vaccination.

Q. Should the same type of vaccine be used for a booster as the original vaccine?

A: Several studies have now been published examining the use of the same vaccine as a booster (third dose) after the first two doses (homologous boosting) and the use of a different vaccine as a third dose (heterologous boosting). While virtually all combinations of booster and initial course vaccines provided significant increase in immune response, most studies have shown that the greatest increase in immune response resulted when a booster of an mRNA vaccine was used following a primary course of either an mRNA vaccine or an adenovirus vector vaccine.

Q: Are vaccines effective against COVID-19 variants?

A: Mutations in key viral proteins can result in the emergence of virus variants emerge. The SARS-CoV-2-coronavirus is prone to mutations that create variants, some of which have become established in many parts of the world. The scientific community and regulators are actively monitoring protection by vaccines against infection and disease with new variants. For example, decreases in the level and duration of protection against the Omicron variant following a two-vaccine course led to many countries adopting a third dose booster program, three or more months following the second vaccination.

A number of vaccine developers are currently developing vaccines against the range of variants, while others are attempting to develop multivalent or pan-specific vaccines, which may protect against future variants. Regulators have agreed that review of data on vaccines against variants will be facilitated based on assessment of immune response to the variant, in the same way that new seasonal influenza vaccines are evaluated each year. However, evidence to date suggests that for people who are not immunocompromised, three doses of the current vaccines provided robust protection against serious illness, hospitalisation or death from the Omicron variant.

Q: Why are there so many vaccine candidates?

A: As the global seriousness of the pandemic became rapidly apparent, development of effective vaccines for COVID-19 became the top priority of many pharmaceutical companies and medical research institutes. There was also unprecedented government and private sector investment in vaccine development. There is now a wide range of technologies for developing new vaccines and many of the organisations developing COVID-19 vaccines have experience in one or more of these technologies. This has ensured that there would still be vaccines available if some were not approved for reasons of efficacy, safety or manufacturing challenges.

Q: What if many people start getting a reaction from a particular COVID-19 vaccine?

A: Short term reactions, such as soreness at the injection site, fatigue or headache are common following any vaccination with COVID-19 vaccines. These reactions usually pass in a day or two. If new evidence becomes available that suggests a specific serious adverse event may be linked to a particular COVID-19 vaccine, then regulators will take action by working collaboratively on a global basis and liaise with public health authorities. The type of actions that can be taken depend on the nature of the adverse event, and could range from issuing safety warnings for patients, healthcare professionals and the community; updating the product information or consumer information for the vaccine to show contraindications for the use in particular patients (e.g. those with certain co-morbidities); to closely monitoring adverse events in certain groups of patients; preventing the release of a particular batch of vaccine through to temporary suspension of the use of the vaccine until more is known.

Q: Should children be vaccinated? Are COVID-19 vaccines safe in children?

A: In many children aged under 12 years, SARS-CoV-2 infection is often asymptomatic or causes a brief illness with mild symptoms. Children at increased risk of severe outcomes from COVID-19 include those with obesity, chronic pulmonary disease, congenital heart disease and neurological disease, as well as those with neurodevelopmental disorders or epilepsy. The sheer number of COVID-19 infections during the Omicron wave, including in children has meant that most countries have experienced numbers of hospitalisation of children (and sadly some deaths) following COVID-19 infection.

Vaccination is also protective against paediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with SARS-CoV-2 (also known as MIS-C), a potentially life-threatening syndrome that occurs in approximately 1 in 3,000 children after infection. In addition to a reduction in illness, vaccination can also reduce the need for isolation in

children (and therefore the disruption to education and social activities) and potentially a reduction in parental absenteeism from employment.

Experience to date with the mRNA vaccines approved for paediatric use is that they are well-tolerated vaccines; where side effects occur, they are generally mild with pain, swelling, and redness at the vaccination site being the most commonly reported side effect. In addition, while myocarditis and pericarditis cases have very rarely been found in under 12’s following vaccination, the rates seem much lower than in older teenagers and adults.

Q: Are COVID-19 vaccines safe in pregnancy?

A: Although pregnant women were not deliberately included in the clinical trials of the COVID-19 vaccines, since the roll out of the vaccines in December 2020 there has been significant experience (particularly with the mRNA vaccines) on COVID-19 vaccination and pregnancy outcomes. A series of studies in a number of countries, both those published in the medical literature and surveillance following use of COVID-19 vaccines carried out by public health bodies and regulators, examining many tens of thousands of pregnancies did not find a higher risk of severe side effects, complications, miscarriages or premature births following vaccination.

At the same time, several studies have shown that COVID-19 infection can have very serious impacts on pregnancy outcomes in certain women, and that the benefits of receiving mRNA outweigh risks for pregnant women and their unborn children. In addition, recent data shows that maternal COVID-19 vaccination is linked to a lower risk of still births, and that perinatal mortality was more than fourfold higher for women giving birth within 28 days of infection.

Q: How are regulators speeding up the time it takes to authorise a COVID-19 vaccine?

A: Many regulators globally have implemented faster access pathways for COVID-19 vaccines, without compromising on strict standards of safety, quality and efficacy.

Some countries have Emergency Use Authorisation pathways which assess the available data at the time of authorisation. Exercising these provisions is a matter for those countries, taking into account the benefits versus risks in the context of the prevailing domestic pandemic situation. Different countries may coin this pathway or authorisation routes differently but essentially, they follow the same principles.

Other countries have implemented accelerated/priority, conditional or provisional approval schemes.

Under normal circumstances, regulatory assessment begins once all information to support registration is available. For COVID-19 vaccines, many regulators have agreed to accept data on a rolling basis to enable early evaluation of data as it becomes available. Regulators will only be in a position to make a provisional or a conditional approval decision for a vaccine once there is sufficient data to support adequately the safety, quality and effectiveness of the vaccine for its intended use. If a decision is made to grant provisional or conditional approval, it will be based on the requirement for the sponsor to submit more comprehensive, longer term clinical data, stability data and other information with agreed timelines.
In a world threatened by conflict, inequities, the climate crisis and pandemics, the Seventy-fifth session of the World Health Assembly will stress the importance of building a healthy and peaceful planet by harnessing science, data, technology and innovation.



This year’s session of the Health Assembly will focus on the theme of “Health for Peace, Peace for Health” and will run from the 22-28 May at the Palais des Nations in Geneva. It will include the appointment of the next WHO Director-General.



“The pandemic has undermined progress towards the health-related targets in Sustainable Development Goals and laid bare inequities within and between countries,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “Sustained recovery will require more than ‘getting back on track’ and reinvesting in existing services and systems. We need a new approach, which means shifting priorities and focusing on the highest-impact interventions.”



The Seventy-fifth World Health Assembly will kick off with a high-level segment on 22 May with speeches from the elected Health Assembly President, Heads of State, special guests, an address by the WHO Director-General and the presentation of the Director-General’s Health Awards. The Director-General’s speech will set out WHO’s five priorities going forward, expanding from the vision delivered at the Executive Board meeting held in January 2022.



Ahead of the Health Assembly, on 20 May, WHO will publish the latest set of World Health Statistics, its annual compilation of health statistics for WHO’s 194 Member States. The latest edition summarizes trends in life expectancy and causes of death and reports on progress towards global health/development goals for 2020.



The 2020-2021 Results Report, also published before WHA, summarizes the Organization's achievements and challenges in implementing the programme budget.



Key issues

The Health Assembly will discuss global strategies on food safety, oral health, and tuberculosis research and innovation. It will also discuss the report of the Working Group on WHO Sustainable financing.



Other key topics under discussion include:

strengthening WHO preparedness for and response to health emergencies;

an implementation road map 2023–2030 for the global action plan for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases;

an Intersectoral Global Action Plan on epilepsy and other neurological disorders 2022-2031;

prevention of sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment;

poliomyelitis; and

the Global Health for Peace Initiative.

Agenda items will be discussed in Committee A, which deals with predominantly programme and budget matters, and Committee B, which deals mainly with administrative, financial and legal matters. Details can be found in the provisional agenda. The venues at the Palais des Nations are: Plenary -- room XIX; Committee A -- room XX; and Committee B -- room XVII.

Assembly delegates, partner agencies, representatives of civil society and WHO experts will also discuss priorities for public health in a series of strategic roundtables. Discussions can be followed online here.



The Health Assembly is WHO’s highest decision-making body, setting out the Organization’s policy and approving its budget. WHA is attended by delegations from all WHO 194 Member States. The Health Assembly’s agenda is prepared by the Programme, Budget and Administration Committee of the Executive Board, which will meet on 18-20 May, 2022.



The Health Assembly is open to Member States, Associate Members, Observers, invited representatives of the UN and other participating inter-governmental organizations and non-State actors.



The Assembly will be webcast live from the WHO website. The provisional agenda and Assembly documents can be accessed here.



A preliminary timetable is available here: Preliminary daily timetable for the Seventy-fifth World Health Assembly.



Media accreditation for the World Health Assembly

Journalists who wish to attend the World Health Assembly and who are NOT accredited to the United Nations should request media accreditation from the United Nations Information Service by registering on the INDICO registration platform.



Updates on the Health Assembly will be posted on the WHO website and relevant materials will be sent to the global media list. Register for updates.



A daily journal will be available here.

Photographs and videos

Information on the WHO Photo Service and videos for media can be obtained from Chris Black on mobile +41 79 472 6054 or email [email protected].

Social media

WHO will provide regular updates from the World Health Assembly via Twitter – follow @WHO and hashtag #WHA75.



Follow WHO’s other social media accounts for updates from #WHA75: Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, YouTube
Despite the the COVID-19 pandemic, the World Health Organization’s 2020-2021 Results Report tracks WHO’s significant achievements across the global health spectrum. Released ahead of the World Health Assembly next week, the report details such accomplishments as the delivery of more than 1.4 billion vaccine doses via the COVAX facility, the recommendation for broad use of the world’s first malaria vaccine and WHO’s response to some 87 health emergencies, including COVID-19.



During 2020-2021, WHO led the largest-ever global response to a health crisis, working with 1600 technical and operational partners, and helped galvanise the biggest, fastest and most complex vaccination drive in history. The Organization spent US$1.7 billion on essential supplies to the COVID-19 response.



“Even as WHO has responded to the most severe global health crisis in a century, we have continued to support our Member States in addressing many other threats to health, despite squeezed budgets and disrupted services,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General.



“As the world continues to respond to and recover from the pandemic in the years ahead, WHO’s priority is to invest even more resources for our work in countries, where it matters most,” he continued. “Ensuring WHO has sustainable, predictable and flexible financing is essential for fulfilling our mission to promote health, keep the world safe and serve the vulnerable.”



The ACT-A partnership delivered over 1 billion COVID-19 vaccine doses by January 2022. The global rollout of crucial health materials included nearly US$500 million worth of personal protective equipment; US$ 187 million in oxygen supplies, US$4.8 million in treatments and 110 million diagnostic tests.



However, much remains to be done for the world to get on track for WHO’s target of each country vaccinating 70% of its population by July 2022.



WHO’s performance beyond pandemic



The Results Report reveals noteworthy achievements beyond the pandemic. Mandatory policies prohibiting the use of trans fatty acids (a hazardous food compound linked to cardiovascular disease), are in effect for 3.2 billion people in 58 countries. Among these countries, 40 have best practice policies, including Brazil, Peru, Singapore, Turkey and the United Kingdom. WHO’s REPLACE initiative aims for a world free of trans-fats by the end of 2023.



Thanks to implementation of measures mandated by WHO's Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, tobacco use is decreasing in 150 countries, saving lives and livelihoods.



Due to efforts to scale up life-saving interventions guided by WHO guidelines, 15 countries have achieved elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV and/or syphilis.



And WHO’s recommendation of widespread use of the world’s first malaria vaccine (RTS,S) has been delivered to over 1 million children. It is expected to save 40 000 to 80 000 lives a year, when used with other malaria control interventions.



A voice for health equity



The report demonstrates WHO’s crucial role as the world’s global health guardian, speaking up for health equity in a world of widening inequalities.



The grave costs of the pandemic were felt everywhere. The report portrays a world which is clearly further off track to reach crucial global health goals. Due to myriad disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, countries have fallen behind on WHO’s “Triple Billion targets” that provide critical pathways to attain the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030.



Progress on Universal health coverage and healthier populations are at about one quarter or less the pace needed to reach the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, and no country was fully prepared for a pandemic of such scale.



COVID-19 also caused huge disruptions to health services: 117 of 127 countries surveyed reported disruption to at least one essential health service because of COVID, whilst the average disruption across those countries was a staggering 45%.



Going forward, fulfilling the triple billion targets will be WHO’s overriding goal, as a measurable means of reducing health equity gaps.



Key role of sustainable financing



The Results Report details WHO’s efforts towards transparency and accountability, providing details of expenditure. The WHO Programme Budget for 2020-2021 was $5 840.4 million. In fact, financing reached US $7 916 million, due to COVID-19 emergency operations. The surplus was thanks to the generosity of donors, including 12 Member States which contributed approximately 71% of the total financing.



Nonetheless, the largest share of WHO financing is earmarked by donors through specified voluntary contributions. Flexible funds constituted only 20% of total financing in 2020-2021.

If WHO is to play its full role in achieving the SDGs, delivering on universal health coverage, reducing the burden of ill health and protecting 1 billion more people from health emergencies, the share of regular, stable, predictable financing must increase.



Note to Editors



COVAX is co-led by CEPI, Gavi and WHO, alongside key delivery partner UNICEF. In the Americas, the PAHO Revolving Fund is the recognized procurement agent for COVAX.



WHO’s Triple Billion targets, by 2023: 1 billion more people benefitting from universal health coverage; 1 billion more people better protected from health emergencies; 1 billion more people enjoying better health and well-being.
More than 1000 film makers from over 110 countries have submitted short films for the 3rd edition of the WHO Health for All Film Festival (HAFF), on themes ranging from the trauma of war to living with COVID-19, through women’s health and so much more. Seventy short films have been chosen for the shortlist reviewed by a jury of international actors, development leaders and senior WHO experts. WHO’s Director-General approved the advice from this jury and announced the winners today.



"These compelling short films, combining powerful storytelling with important public health information, portray the huge range of health challenges that people face around the world every day,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “With 3500 submissions received over three years so far, the WHO Health for All Film Festival has demonstrated that short films can make a big difference to raising awareness on these important health issues, and stimulate action to promote and protect health."



The 70 shortlisted films are available to view online in six playlists. From this official selection one “GRAND PRIX” is attributed for each of the three main competition categories: Universal Health Coverage, Health emergencies, and Better health and well-being.



Sharon Stone, Golden Globe and EMMY Award-winning Actress from the United States of America, juror of the 3rd HAFF, Producer, and Activist for Health and Humanitarian Causes, said: "I am so delighted to be part of the Health for All Film Festival. This is about creating better awareness on crucial actions needed for reaching healthier living conditions around the world. These documentaries that we viewed were all just wonderful. The stories selected talk to us about the intrinsic value of good health and its access, and they advocate for universal health coverage. Universal health coverage is a very important right, it’s a human right for everyone around the world."

Four special prizes are also attributed for a Student-Produced Film, a film on Rehabilitation, a Health Innovation Film and a Very Short Film.



Emilia Clarke, Actress and Health Activist from the United Kingdom, and juror of the 3rd HAFF, said: "It has been an honour and a pleasure for me to join the jury of the Health for All Film Festival by the World Health Organization, especially for watching this year’s special category about Rehabilitation which is something I care about and believe in deeply, as my Foundation is dedicated to this issue for people affected by brain injuries. Where rehabilitation means coming back to rediscover you are still the SameYou.

I hope that you’ll be moved as I was by the winning short film of this special prize, not only is it for a cause close to my heart but it also is one of the most beautiful short films I’ve seen in a long time, as well as many others that I invite and encourage you to watch online at this festival’s website, it was such a close call as all the films we watched each had their own magic and importance!”



List of films receiving awards



UHC “GRAND PRIX”:

“Pre-eclampsia: Predict Earlier, Prevent Earlier” - Indonesia / Maternal health / Documentary – Duration 7’53’’ / Submitted and directed by Indonesian Prenatal Institute



Health Emergencies “GRAND PRIX”:

“Intensive” - United Kingdom / COVID-19 severe case / Animation – Duration 7’26’’ / Submitted and directed by Oliver John Pratt (United Kingdom)

Better Health and Well-being “GRAND PRIX”:

“Euphoric” - India / Female Genital Mutilation / Artistic creation based on testimony – Duration 4’35’’ / Submitted and directed by Nirmala Choudhary and Roopali Ramesh Kumar (India)

SPECIAL PRIZE Rehabilitation Film:

“Sim-Patia” – Spain - Italy / Brain injury / Animation - Duration 2’42’’ / Submitted and directed by Carlos Gómez-Mira Sagrado and Rossana Giacomelli



SPECIAL PRIZE Health Innovation film:

“For Every Girl, a Forest” - India / Gender equity / Documentary – Duration 6’24’’ / Submitted and directed by Jose Corbella (Argentina)

STUDENT FILM PRIZE:

“Improving Lives in Three Dimensions: 3D-Printed Prostheses” - Sierra Leone / Disability / Documentary – Duration 5’03’’

Submitted and directed by Merel van der Stelt (The Netherlands)

SPECIAL PRIZE Very Short Film:

“Glamming my Wounds” - Kenya / Gender Based Violence / Fiction – Duration 1’55’’

Submitted and directed by Terry Adhiambo Ombaka (Kenya)

List of films receiving a special mention from the jury

UHC Special Mention:

“The 5% : A Family’s Perspective on Complex Clubfoot” - Brazil / Disability / Documentary – Duration 5’40’’ / Submitted by MiracleFeet and directed by Rachel Vianna (Brazil)

Health Emergencies Special Mention: “I was just a child” - Philippines / Natural disasters / Animation – Duration 5’06’’ / Submitted and directed by Breech Asher Harani (Philippines)

Better Health and Well-being Special Mention:

“Autism in China: The Challenges Parents Face Raising Children of the Stars” - China / Documentary – Duration 8’28’’ / Submitted and directed by Andersen Weicong Xia (China)

Rehabilitation Special Mention:

“Move, Dance, Feel” - United Kingdom / Cancer and artistic dancing to support treatment / Documentary – Duration 4’58’’ / Submitted and directed by Emily Jenkins and Move Dance Feel (United Kingdom)

Health Innovation Special Mention: “Malakit” - Brazil, French Guiana, Suriname / Malaria - Access to diagnosis and care in remote areas / Documentary – Duration 8’54’’ / Submitted and directed by Maylis Douine (French Guiana)



Very Short Films Special Mention:

“Meet the Willbuts” - Saint Kitts and Nevis / NCDs prevention / Animation – Duration 1’23’’ / Submitted and directed by Oyehmi Begho and Lake Health and Wellbeing (Saint Kitts and Nevis)



For more details on the official selection, the jury composition and further information, please visit https://www.who.int/film-festival
WHO’s COVID-19 Technology Access Pool (C-TAP) and the Medicines Patent Pool (MPP) today finalized a licensing agreement with the United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) for the development of several innovative therapeutics, early-stage vaccines and diagnostic tools for COVID-19.

The licenses, which are transparent, global and non-exclusive, will allow manufacturers from around the world to work with MPP and C-TAP to make these technologies accessible to people living in low- and middle-income countries and help put an end to the pandemic.

The 11 COVID-19 technologies offered under two licences include the stabilized spike protein used in currently available COVID-19 vaccines, research tools for vaccine, therapeutic and diagnostic development as well as early-stage vaccine candidates and diagnostics. The full list of the NIH COVID-19 technologies covered in the agreement is here.

“I welcome the generous contribution NIH has made to C-TAP and its example of solidarity and sharing,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “Whether it’s today’s pandemic or tomorrow’s health emergency, it’s through sharing and empowering lower-income countries to manufacture their own health tools that we can ensure a healthier future for everyone.”



“We are honoured to sign these public health-driven licence agreements with NIH under the auspices of C-TAP with the goal of providing equitable access to life-saving health products for the most vulnerable in the world,” said Charles Gore, MPP Executive Director.



“NIH were the first to share their patents with MPP for an HIV product back in 2010 when we were created, and we are delighted to continue strengthening our partnership. It is clear that MPP’s model works across different health technologies.”

The announcement was made today by the US Government at the second Global COVID-19 Summit, co-hosted by the United States, Belize, Germany, Indonesia and Senegal.

Licensing the NIH technologies to MPP under the auspices of C-TAP will allow greater access to these technologies and hopefully lead to the development of commercial products that can address current and future public health needs. In most circumstances, NIH will not collect royalties on sales of products licensed in 49 countries classified by the United Nations as Least Developed Countries.

Launched in 2020 by the WHO Director-General and the President of Costa Rica, and supported by 43 Member States, C-TAP aims to facilitate timely, equitable and affordable access to COVID-19 health products by boosting their production and supply through open, transparent and non-exclusive licensing agreements. MPP provides the licensing expertise to this initiative and holds the licences.

The 11 technologies include:
This week, world leaders will gather to consider crucial next steps in the global COVID-19 response. We applaud the co-hosts of the Second Global COVID-19 Summit – the United States, Belize, Germany, Indonesia and Senegal – for bringing together governments from across the globe to make concrete commitments to vaccinate the world, save lives now and build better health security.

Recent WHO estimates show the death toll associated with COVID-19 in 2020 and 2021 was just under 15 million, a sobering reminder of the human cost of this pandemic. With reported cases falling globally, it is tempting – but misguided – to think the crisis is over. This is the moment to intensify efforts, not to ease off. This summit gives leaders the opportunity to write the closing chapters of the pandemic – an opportunity they cannot afford to miss.

It is imperative that leaders seize this opportunity to mobilize the funding and political will required to achieve global targets for COVID-19 vaccination coverage, testing rates and access to treatments, including oral antivirals and oxygen. Achieving these targets is essential to ending the pandemic, by reducing transmission and protecting everyone from the harms of COVID-19.

A decisive global response will mitigate the economic fallout of COVID-19, including the supply disruptions that are contributing to inflation and slow growth in many parts of the world. Definitively ending COVID-19 will also enable the world to better focus on reversing the lost progress against other diseases and getting routine immunization back on track, especially critical for children’s survival and development.

However, the current context for ending the pandemic is making this work harder. Testing rates around the globe are plummeting, which means we cannot track the trajectory of this evolving virus, with low-income countries testing at an average of just 5 tests per day per 100,000 people – far from the goal of 100 per day.

Despite the significant progress made increasing coverage rates in lower-income countries, millions are still unvaccinated and exposed, with just over 15% of people in low-income countries having received a vaccine. Supporting country targets in light of the WHO goal of 70% coverage – especially prioritizing full coverage of at-risk groups – remains the best way to save lives, protect health systems and minimize cases of Long COVID. Access to effective new antivirals is limited by constrained supply and low testing rates, while medical oxygen and PPE shortages are still impacting many countries.

The ACT-Accelerator published a strategic plan and budget in October 2021 to address these inequities. We have made concrete progress on all fronts – but the partnership still faces a huge financing gap. We, the leaders of the ACT-Accelerator’s constituent agencies, are concerned that 6 months into our new budget cycle, just over 10% of our financing needs have been met.

Three months ago, we launched our financing framework with ‘fair share’ asks of the world’s richest countries, calculated based on the size of their national economies and what they would gain from a faster recovery of the global economy and trade. As of today, 6 countries have led the way in pledging at least 25% of their fair share – but we need more.

With the world’s attention drawn to other urgent crises, billions of people continue to suffer from a lack of equitable access to COVID-19 tools – taken for granted in many countries – due to a lack of funds and political will. Countries are juggling multiple competing health, economic, and social priorities, but they will drop all of these balls if the pandemic is prolonged and allowed to flare up again. A lack of funding for the rollout of vaccines and treatments is curtailing ambitions, precluding the population-wide vaccination campaigns and intensive outreach needed.

The BA.4 and BA.5 Omicron sub-variants driving up deaths and hospitalizations in places with high immunity is a warning that the global response needs to get ahead of future Variants of Concern. We must invest in research and development to update our tools, rolling out vaccines, tests and treatments to reduce and monitor transmission, while mitigating the impact of the pandemic and protecting essential services. Such actions should underpin an endgame strategy for the pandemic.

The actions set out by the Summit co-hosts will go a long way to addressing the financing and policy gaps that are currently holding back the COVID-19 response. Ending the pandemic in 2022 requires global leadership. Collectively, richer countries must fully fund the ACT-Accelerator’s US$15 billion financing gap, while all countries must commit to national policies and strategies that optimize our ability to control the pandemic, both nationally and globally. The pandemic will not end until access to vaccines, tests, treatments and PPE is achieved for everyone, everywhere.

We cannot afford to delay anymore. Lives, economies and global health security depend on the outcome of this Summit.

This week, we urge world leaders, the private sector, philanthropists, civil society and other stakeholders to make the firm, substantive commitments needed to save lives, turn the tide and secure the future for all.

Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus – Director-General, the World Health Organization

Dr Seth Berkley – CEO, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance

Dr Philippe Duneton – Executive Director, Unitaid

Dr Chris Elias – President, Global Development Division, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation

Sir Jeremy Farrar – Director, Wellcome

Dr Richard Hatchett – CEO, CEPI

Dr Bill Rodriguez – CEO, FIND

Catherine Russell – Executive Director, UNICEF

Peter Sands - Executive Director, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
A new report from the World Health Organization highlights the increasing use of sophisticated online marketing techniques for alcohol and the need for more effective regulation. It shows that young people and heavy drinkers are increasingly targeted by alcohol advertising, often to the detriment of their health.

Reducing the harm from alcohol – by regulating cross-border alcohol marketing, advertising and promotion is the first report from WHO to detail the full extent of the way that alcohol is today being marketed across national borders – often by digital means – and in many cases regardless of the social, economic or cultural environment in receiving countries.

Worldwide, 3 million people die each year as a result of harmful use of alcohol – one every 10 seconds – representing about 5% of all deaths. A disproportionate number of these alcohol--related deaths occur among younger people, with 13.5% of all deaths among those who are 20–39 years of age being alcohol-related.



“Alcohol robs young people, their families and societies of their lives and potential,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of the World Health Organization. “Yet despite the clear risks to health, controls on the marketing of alcohol are much weaker than for other psychoactive products. Better, well enforced and more consistent regulation of alcohol marketing would both save and improve young lives across the world.”



A digital revolution in marketing and promotion

One of the biggest changes in recent years to alcohol marketing is the use of sophisticated online marketing. The collection and analysis of data on users’ habits and preferences by global Internet providers has created new and growing opportunities for alcohol marketers to target messages to specific groups across national borders. Targeted advertising on social media is especially effective at using such data, with its impact strengthened by social influencers and sharing of posts between social media users.

One data source quoted in the report calculated that over 70% of media spending of leading alcohol marketers based in the USA in 2019 was through promotions, product placement and online advertisements in social media.



“The rising importance of digital media means that alcohol marketing has become increasingly cross-border”, said Dag Rekve of the Alcohol, Drugs and Addictive Behaviours Unit at the World Health Organization. “This makes it more difficult for countries that are regulating alcohol marketing to effectively control it in their jurisdictions. More collaboration between countries in this area is needed.”

Sponsorship of sporting events



Sponsorship of major sporting events at global, regional and national levels is another key strategy used by transnational alcohol companies (which are gaining increasing dominance in the production and branding of alcohol beverages). Such sponsorship can significantly increase awareness of their brands to new audiences. In addition, alcohol producers engage in partnership with sports leagues and clubs to reach viewers and potential consumers in different parts of the world.

The increasing market of e-sports, including competitive gaming events, is another opportunity to sponsor events and increase brand recognition and international sales. So is product placement in movies and serials, many of which are streamed on international subscription channels. According to an analysis of the 100 highest-grossing box office U.S. movies between 1996 and 2015, branded alcohol was shown in almost half of them.

A focus on marketing to specific audiences

The lack of regulation to address cross-border marketing of alcohol is of particular concern for children and adolescents, women, and heavy drinkers.

Studies have shown that starting to drink alcohol at a young age is a predictor of hazardous drinking in young adulthood and beyond. Furthermore, teenage drinkers are more vulnerable to harm from alcohol consumption than older drinkers. Areas of the world with young and growing populations, such as Africa and Latin America, are being particularly targeted.

In addition, alcohol consumption among women is an important growth sector for alcohol production and sales. While three quarters of the alcohol that the world drinks is consumed by males, alcohol marketers tend to see the lower rate of women drinking as an opportunity to grow their market, often depicting drinking by women as a symbol of empowerment and equality. They organize corporate social responsibility initiatives, on topics such as breast cancer and domestic violence, and engage with women known for their success in areas such as sports or the arts to promote brands of alcohol.



Heavy and dependent drinkers are another target for marketing efforts, since in many countries just 20% of current drinkers drink well over half of all alcohol consumed. Alcohol-dependent people frequently report a stronger urge to drink alcohol when confronted with alcohol-related cues, yet they rarely have an effective way to avoid exposure to the content of the advertising or promotion.

Existing regulation primarily limited to individual states



While many countries have some form of restrictions on alcohol marketing in place, generally they tend to be relatively weak. In a WHO 2018 study, it was found that, while most countries have some form of regulation for alcohol marketing in traditional media, almost half have no regulation in place for Internet (48%) and social media (47%) marketing of alcohol.



Meanwhile, sustained attention and work by national governments, the public health community and WHO to limit the availability and promotion of tobacco products, with specific attention to the cross-border aspects of tobacco production and marketing, has led to life-saving reductions in global tobacco use and exposure.



International cooperation required

The report concludes that national governments need to integrate comprehensive restrictions or bans of alcohol marketing, including its cross-border aspects, in public health strategies. It highlights key features and options for the regulation of cross-border marketing of alcohol and stresses the need for strong collaboration between states in this area.

Note for editors:

Drinking alcohol is causally linked to an array of health problems such as mental and behavioural disorders, including alcohol dependence; major noncommunicable diseases such as liver cirrhosis, some cancers and cardiovascular diseases; and injuries and deaths resulting from violence and road traffic crashes.
To support emergency health needs in Ukraine, World Health Organization (WHO) today gave 20 all-terrain ambulances able to function in even the most damaged and inaccessible areas to the Ministry of Health of Ukraine.

“We bring not just supplies but support based on your needs. Today we are handing to you 20 ambulances, along with generators and blood refrigerators to hospitals wherever they are needed.'' said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO Director-General handing over the keys to the Deputy Minister of Health Iryna Mykychak in Lviv, Ukraine. “But the most important thing we want to see delivered is peace.”

“Today, as we consolidate our efforts with WHO, we need to strengthen our national health care system. And these are very effective ways to support our doctors, who heroically provide medical care in Ukraine in difficult times. Today we received modern off-road vehicles from the WHO to ensure medical evacuation. These ambulances can drive to the most important places available, even where the roads have been most damaged” said Deputy Minister Mykychak as she looked over the new addition to the emergency relief team’s fleet. “We are infinitely grateful to all our international partners for such important and significant support of Ukraine. We worked closely with the WHO team in Ukraine for a long time, long before the war in health care reform in Ukraine. I am confident that together we will provide necessary support people of Ukraine and address health needs. We need peace.”

Dr Tedros has been in Ukraine for 3 days of meetings with senior government leaders and to assess the current health needs in Ukraine. During this time he visited health facilities damaged during the war and spoke with health care workers who worked tirelessly, providing care by torchlight and eventually evacuating all patients when it became too dangerous to continue.

Two months into the war, the medical infrastructure in Ukraine has been significantly damaged due to the continuous attacks on health care, and access to health care in many areas has been severely impacted. This donation of 20 ambulances will help bring vital lifesaving care to people in Ukraine and improve the national emergency medical teams' timeliness and quality of health services.

“WHO is committed to supporting people in Ukraine in accessing much-needed health services. The donation of 20 ambulances will bring lifesaving care as Ukraine’s health services have been significantly stretched and access to health care remains a challenge for many people,” said Dr Jarno Habicht, WHO Representative and Head of the WHO Country Office in Ukraine. “One of the health workers we spoke to remembered how during the days of constant shelling in their city, ambulances continued to operate even during curfew to ensure people received the care they needed. We are inspired by the bravery of Ukrainian health workers and hope this donation will contribute to their work.”

WHO has so far delivered 393 metric tonnes of emergency and medical supplies and equipment to Ukraine. Of that amount, 167 metric tonnes have reached their intended destinations, mostly in the east, south and north of the country where the need is greatest.

Notes to editors:

● Barely a week after the war started in Ukraine, WHO launched an appeal for three months (March – May 2022) for US$ 57.5 million to address the needs of 6 million people: US$45 million for health response in Ukraine and another US$12.5 million for the health needs of Ukrainian people affected by the conflict in neighbouring countries. This is WHO’s first appeal to respond to the ongoing war in Ukraine, and it has been fully funded.

● WHO is the United Nations agency that connects nations, partners and people to promote health, keep the world safe and serve the vulnerable – so everyone, everywhere can attain the highest level of health. WHO leads global efforts to expand universal health coverage. We direct and coordinate the world’s response to health emergencies. We promote healthier lives – from pregnancy care through old age. WHO works across 194 countries in 6 regions of the world, including the European Region which encompasses 53 countries across Europe and Central Asia. WHO staff include the world’s leading public health experts, bringing together doctors, epidemiologists, scientists and managers – all champions for healthier, safer lives everywhere.
The COVID-19 pandemic and other recent large disease outbreaks have highlighted the extent to which health care settings can contribute to the spread of infections, harming patients, health workers and visitors, if insufficient attention is paid to infection prevention and control (IPC). But a new report from the World Health Organization (WHO) shows that where good hand hygiene and other cost-effective practices are followed, 70% of those infections can be prevented.

Today, out of every 100 patients in acute-care hospitals, seven patients in high-income countries and 15 patients in low- and middle-income countries will acquire at least one health care-associated infection (HAI) during their hospital stay. On average, 1 in every 10 affected patients will die from their HAI.



People in intensive care and newborns are particularly at risk. And the report reveals that approximately one in four hospital-treated sepsis cases and almost half of all cases of sepsis with organ dysfunction treated in adult intensive-care units are health care-associated.



Today, on the eve of World Hand Hygiene Day, WHO is previewing the first ever Global Report on Infection Prevention and Control which brings together evidence from scientific literature and various reports, and new data from WHO studies.



“The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed many challenges and gaps in IPC in all regions and countries, including those which had the most advanced IPC programmes,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director General. “It has also provided an unprecedented opportunity to take stock of the situation and rapidly scale up outbreak readiness and response through IPC practices, as well as strengthening IPC programmes across the health system. Our challenge now is to ensure that all countries are able to allocate the human resources, supplies and infrastructures this requires.”



The new WHO report provides the first-ever global situation analysis of how IPC programmes are being implemented in countries around the world, including regional and country focuses. While highlighting the harm to patients and healthcare workers caused by HAIs and antimicrobial resistance, the report also addresses the impact and cost-effectiveness of infection prevention and control programmes and the strategies and resources available to countries to improve them.



The impact of healthcare associated infections and antimicrobial resistance on people’s lives is incalculable. Over 24% of patients affected by health care-associated sepsis and 52.3% of those patients treated in an intensive care unit die each year. Deaths are increased two to threefold when infections are resistant to antimicrobials.



In the last five years, WHO has conducted global surveys and country joint evaluations to assess the implementation status of national IPC programmes. Comparing data from the 2017–18 and the 2021–22 surveys, the percentage of countries having a national IPC programme did not improve; furthermore in 2021–22 only four out of 106 assessed countries (3.8%) had all minimum requirements for IPC in place at the national level. This is reflected in inadequate implementation of IPC practices at the point of care, with only 15.2% of health care facilities meeting all of the IPC minimum requirements, according to a WHO survey in 2019.



However, encouraging progress has been made in some areas, with a significant increase being seen in the percentage of countries having an appointed IPC focal point, a dedicated budget for IPC and curriculum for front-line health care workers’ training; developing national IPC guidelines and a national programme or plan for HAI surveillance; using multimodal strategies for IPC interventions; and establishing hand hygiene compliance as a key national indicator.



Many countries are demonstrating strong engagement and progress in scaling-up actions to put in place minimum requirements and core components of IPC programmes. Progress is being strongly supported by WHO and other key players. Sustaining and further expanding this progress in the long-term is a critical need that requires urgent attention and investments.



The report reveals that high-income countries are more likely to be progressing their IPC work, and are eight times more likely to have a more advanced IPC implementation status than low-income countries. Indeed, little improvement was seen between 2018 and 2021 in the implementation of IPC national programmes in low-income countries, despite increased attention being paid generally to IPC due to the COVID-19 pandemic. WHO will continue to support countries to ensure IPC programmes can be improved in every region.



WHO is calling on all countries around the globe to increase their investment in IPC programmes to ensure quality of care and patient and health workers’ safety. This will not only protect their populations, increased investment in IPC has also demonstrated to improve health outcomes and reduce health-care costs and out-of-pocket expenses.





# # #



Notes to Editors



IPC is a clinical and public health specialty based on a practical, evidence-based approach which prevents patients, health workers, and visitors to health care facilities from being harmed by avoidable infections, including those caused by antimicrobial-resistant pathogens, acquired during the provision of health care services. It occupies a unique position in the field of patient and health workers’ safety and quality of care, as it is universally relevant to every health worker and patient, at every health care interaction.

About WHO

The World Health Organization provides global leadership in public health within the United Nations system. Founded in 1948, WHO works with 194 Member States, across six regions and from 149 offices, to promote health, keep the world safe and serve the vulnerable. Our goal for 2019–2023 is to ensure that a billion more people have universal health coverage, to protect a billion more people from health emergencies, and provide a further billion people with better health and wellbeing.

For updates on COVID-19 and public health advice to protect yourself from coronavirus, visit www.who.int and follow WHO on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, TikTok, Pinterest, Snapchat, YouTube, Twitch.
New estimates from the World Health Organization (WHO) show that the full death toll associated directly or indirectly with the COVID-19 pandemic (described as “excess mortality”) between 1 January 2020 and 31 December 2021 was approximately 14.9 million (range 13.3 million to 16.6 million).

“These sobering data not only point to the impact of the pandemic but also to the need for all countries to invest in more resilient health systems that can sustain essential health services during crises, including stronger health information systems,” said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “WHO is committed to working with all countries to strengthen their health information systems to generate better data for better decisions and better outcomes.”



Excess mortality is calculated as the difference between the number of deaths that have occurred and the number that would be expected in the absence of the pandemic based on data from earlier years.

Excess mortality includes deaths associated with COVID-19 directly (due to the disease) or indirectly (due to the pandemic’s impact on health systems and society). Deaths linked indirectly to COVID-19 are attributable to other health conditions for which people were unable to access prevention and treatment because health systems were overburdened by the pandemic. The estimated number of excess deaths can be influenced also by deaths averted during the pandemic due to lower risks of certain events, like motor-vehicle accidents or occupational injuries.

Most of the excess deaths (84%) are concentrated in South-East Asia, Europe, and the Americas. Some 68% of excess deaths are concentrated in just 10 countries globally. Middle-income countries account for 81% of the 14.9 million excess deaths (53% in lower-middle-income countries and 28% in upper-middle-income countries) over the 24-month period, with high-income and low-income countries each accounting for 15% and 4%, respectively.

The estimates for a 24-month period (2020 and 2021) include a breakdown of excess mortality by age and sex. They confirm that the global death toll was higher for men than for women (57% male, 43% female) and higher among older adults. The absolute count of the excess deaths is affected by the population size. The number of excess deaths per 100,000 gives a more objective picture of the pandemic than reported COVID-19 mortality data.



“Measurement of excess mortality is an essential component to understand the impact of the pandemic. Shifts in mortality trends provide decision-makers information to guide policies to reduce mortality and effectively prevent future crises. Because of limited investments in data systems in many countries, the true extent of excess mortality often remains hidden,” said Dr Samira Asma, Assistant Director-General for Data, Analytics and Delivery at WHO. “These new estimates use the best available data and have been produced using a robust methodology and a completely transparent approach.”

“Data is the foundation of our work every day to promote health, keep the world safe, and serve the vulnerable. We know where the data gaps are, and we must collectively intensify our support to countries, so that every country has the capability to track outbreaks in real-time, ensure delivery of essential health services, and safeguard population health,” said Dr Ibrahima Socé Fall, Assistant Director-General for Emergency Response.

The production of these estimates is a result of a global collaboration supported by the work of the Technical Advisory Group for COVID-19 Mortality Assessment and country consultations.

This group, convened jointly by the WHO and the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA), consists of many of the world’s leading experts, who developed an innovative methodology to generate comparable mortality estimates even where data are incomplete or unavailable.

This methodology has been invaluable as many countries still lack capacity for reliable mortality surveillance and therefore do not collect and generate the data needed to calculate excess mortality. Using the publicly available methodology, countries can use their own data to generate or update their own estimates.

“The United Nations system is working together to deliver an authoritative assessment of the global toll of lives lost from the pandemic. This work is an important part of UN DESA’s ongoing collaboration with WHO and other partners to improve global mortality estimates,” said Mr Liu Zhenmin, United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs.

Mr Stefan Schweinfest, Director of the Statistics Division of UN DESA, added: “Data deficiencies make it difficult to assess the true scope of a crisis, with serious consequences for people’s lives. The pandemic has been a stark reminder of the need for better coordination of data systems within countries and for increased international support for building better systems, including for the registration of deaths and other vital events.”

Note for editors:



The methods were developed by the Technical Advisory Group for COVID-19 Mortality Assessment, co-chaired by Professor Debbie Bradshaw and Dr. Kevin McCormack with extensive support from Professor Jon Wakefield at the University of Washington. The methods rely on a statistical model derived using information from countries with adequate data; the model is used to generate estimates for countries with little or no data available. The methods and estimates will continue to be updated as additional data become available and in consultation with countries.


